The Project Gutenberg eBook of John de Lancaster; vol. I., by Richard
Cumberland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: John de Lancaster; vol. I.

Author: Richard Cumberland

Release Date: September 27, 2022 [eBook #69055]

Language: English

Produced by: Sonya Schermann, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN DE LANCASTER; VOL.
I. ***





                          JOHN DE LANCASTER.


                               VOLUME I.




                          JOHN DE LANCASTER.

                               A NOVEL.

                                  BY

                      _RICHARD CUMBERLAND, ESQ._

                           IN THREE VOLUMES.

                                VOL. I.

                               _LONDON_:

                PRINTED FOR LACKINGTON, ALLEN, AND CO.

                         TEMPLE OF THE MUSES,

                           FINSBURY-SQUARE.

                                 1809.




           Harding and Wright, Printers, St. John’s Square.




JOHN DE LANCASTER.




CHAPTER I.

_The Reader is made acquainted with the Family of De Lancaster._


On the first of March 1751, Robert De Lancaster, a native of North
Wales, and grandfather of my hero, had assembled his friends and
neighbours to celebrate, according to custom, the anniversary of their
tutelary saint.

I enter at once upon my story without any introduction, having already
announced this novel in my Memoirs, and I flatter myself, if it is
perused with that candour, to which fair dealing has some claim, it
will serve to entertain the major part of its readers, disappoint not
many and corrupt not one.

Robert de Lancaster was a gentleman of great respectability, and
Kray-castle, the venerable seat of his family through many generations,
lost nothing of its long-established fame for hospitality on this
occasion: the gentry were feasted, and the poor were not forgotten.

The family of this worthy antient Briton consisted of an only son
Philip, married to an heiress of the house of Morgan, and a maiden
daughter, named Cecilia. He was himself a widower. Mrs. Philip De
Lancaster was at this time in that state, which gave speedy hopes of an
heir to the very ancient family, into which she had married: in the
festivities of the day she had taken little share, and in the
superintendence of her father-in-law’s household absolutely none: that
province she had found in much more able hands, and never sought to
interfere with the administration of it: in short she had no ambition
for authority, and very great objection to any thing, that might require
exertion, or occasion trouble.

Cecilia De Lancaster from the death of her mother, through a period of
more than ten years, had patiently and without repining suffered her
youth to pass away, amply repayed by the love and approbation of her
father, whilst she devoted herself to all those duties, which had
devolved upon her, when Kray Castle lost its mistress. Her brother
Philip had quite as little disposition to trouble as his lady, so that
all things were under the unenvied government of Cecilia; and every
guest, that resorted to the house, every domestic, that belonged to it,
bore witness to the excellence of her administration.

A character like hers, though located amidst the recesses of
Merionethshire, could not be totally divested of attraction; for she had
high pretensions on the score of fortune, and a pedigree, that only
stopped where the world began: these might have been enough to satisfy
any reasonable man, though some perhaps would have rated them the higher
for the loveliness of her person, the excellence of her understanding
and the virtues of her mind.

Amongst the many suitors, who in various periods of her celibacy had
been induced to propose themselves to her, none had been so persevering
in his addresses as Sir Owen ap Owen, baronet, a gentleman by no means
of yesterday, and possessed of a very fair and ample landed property,
upon which there were no other encumbrances save only the barren rocks
and unproductive mountains, over which it stretched. He was indeed not
very eminent as a scholar; for although Sir Owen had without doubt been
taught to read, he had almost entirely discontinued the practice of it:
and indeed, considering the nature of Sir Owen’s more immediate
pursuits, reading might very well be dispensed with, as it could only
tend to interrupt his evening nap, and not improve him in the art of
hallooing to his hounds, or pushing round the tankard to a tawdry toast:
he however administered justice to his neighbours, and settled
differences in a summary way after a fashion of his own, by reference
not to any books of law, but to the beer barrels in his cellar; by
which his decisions as a magistrate became extremely popular, and men
quarrelled first, that they might get drunk afterwards, and patch up the
peace in their cups, which they had broken when they were sober. By
these means Sir Owen got a good name in the county, and supported a
considerable interest, which he never failed to employ, as his fathers
had done before him, in opposing and railing at the minister of the day,
whoever that obnoxious animal might chance to be.

This distinguished personage was now in the fifth year of his
suitorship, and verging towards the fiftieth of his age, whilst the
inexorable Cecilia had already endured a siege half as long as that of
Troy, without betraying any symptoms, that might indicate a surrender.
In fact Sir Owen seemed now to content himself with a yearly summons,
like the Moors before Ceuta, as a compliment to his perseverance, and to
keep up appearances and pretensions.

It was now Saint David’s day, when he never failed to be a visitor to
the castle, and he had brushed out the lining of his coach, and put
himself in his best array, to do honour to the festival, at which he
knew Cecilia would preside. His person was not eminently graceful, for
he was a round, red-faced gentleman, neither tall of stature, nor light
of limb; but his apparel bore the faded marks of ancient splendor, and
his huntsman had bestowed uncommon pains in frizzing out a huge white
perriwig, which he had powdered with no sparing hand. Sir Owen was at no
time apt to be an idle looker-on whilst the bottle was in circulation,
and on the present occasion he had charged himself more than usually
high to encounter an opposition, which he had reason to expect would be
more than usually stubborn; for though due consideration had been paid
to his rank, and he had been placed at table close beside the lady, who
presided at it, fortune had not favoured him with any striking
opportunities for displaying his address, or advancing himself in her
good graces. On the contrary he had been rather unlucky in his
assiduities, and in his eagerness to dispute the ladle had overset the
soup, with sundry other little misadventures, incidental to an awkward
operator and an unsteady hand.

It is perfectly well understood, that the worthy baronet had pledged
himself to his privy counsellor the huntsman for vigorous measures;
confessing to him, whilst assisting at his toilette, with the candour
natural to his character, that he was ashamed of hanging so long upon a
cold scent, and protesting, with a due degree of spirit, that he would
that very day either bring the trail to an entapis, or give up the
chace, and draw off; for which manly resolution he had all proper credit
given him by the partaker of his secrets, and the companion of his
sports.

When the gentlemen had sate a reasonable time after the ladies had
retired, it was the custom of the house to adjourn to the drawing room,
where Cecilia administered the ceremonials of the tea-table. It was here
Sir Owen meditated to plant himself once more by her side, and bring his
fortune to a crisis; trusting that wine, which had fortified him with
courage, would not fail to inspire him with eloquence. High in hope,
and eager to acquit himself of his promise to his confidante at home,
upon entering the room he pushed his course directly for the tea-table,
where the cluster of candles and the dazzling gleams reflected from the
polished apparatus, there displayed in glittering splendor, so
confounded his optics, that without discovering the person of Mrs.
Philip De Lancaster, or computing distances so as to bring up in time,
he came foul of the tea-table, and discharged a part of the wreck with a
horrible crash into the lap of the aforesaid lady, whilst his head came
to the floor amidst the fragments of broken cups and sawcers with an
impunity, which no common head would probably have had to boast of in
the like circumstance. Dreadful was the consternation of the company,
most alarmingly critical were the screams and convulsive throes of the
unfortunate lady, whose lap was ill prepared to receive any such
accession to the burden, which it was already doomed to carry. The
consequences in short were so immediate, and their symptoms so decisive,
that had not Mr. Llewellyn been in attendance, and happily not quite so
tipsy as to be incapacitated from affording his assistance, the world
might have lost the pleasure of reading these adventures, and I the fame
of recording them.

A couch being provided, and the lady laid at her length upon it, she was
carried up to her chamber, whilst the castle echoed with her piercing
screams.

It would be treating this serious misadventure much too lightly, were I
only to remark that the love-scene in projectu was of necessity
adjourned by Cecilia’s leaving the company, and attending upon her
sister-in-law, whom a whole bevy of females under the conduct of the
sage Llewellyn followed up the stairs. We may well suppose, where one so
able was present to direct, and so many were assembled, ready either to
obey, or sagaciously to look on and edify, that every thing needful for
a lady in her critical situation was provided and administered. Every
visitor, whose recollection served to remind him that after such a
discomfiture the speediest retreat was the best compliment he could pay
to the master of the house, called for their horses and their carriages
to the great disappointment of their servants, who had not yet paid all
the honours to Saint David, that were by customary right Saint David’s
due.

Sir Owen ap Owen, who had already taken some little time to recover his
legs, found himself still at a loss to recall his recollection. At
length, after contemplating the chaos he had created--By the Lord,
friend De Lancaster, he exclaimed, I have made a terrible wreck of your
crockery; but you should warn your housemaids not to dry rub your
floors, for they are as slippery as glass, and let a man tread ever so
carefully, a false step may throw him off his balance, and then who can
answer for the mischief he may do? I heard a terrible screaming, but I
hope, my good neighbour, nobody is hurt, and if your fair daughter, the
divine Cecilia, (so I always call her) is inconsolable about her china,
and if London can’t repair the loss, the East Indies shall, though I go
all the way to fetch it home for her myself; for though I know well
enough I have had a glass too much, and am but as you may call me a kind
of bear in a ball-room, yet I know what a gentleman ought to do, when he
has done mischief; and on the word of a true ancient Briton you may
believe me, that if I had undesignedly set fire to your house, I am no
such Hanoverian rat as to run away by the light of it: that is not my
principle.

Your principle, my good friend, replied De Lancaster, nobody doubts, and
if your accident shall be productive of no other mischief than what has
happened to Cecilia’s tea-cups, Cecilia thinks no more of them than I
do. The screams you heard did not proceed from her--

No, no, cried Sir Owen, her sweet pipe never uttered such a shrill
veiw-hollah; so if she is safe from hurt and harm, all is well. ’Twas
an accident, as you say, and there’s an end of it.

A servant now announced to the baronet, that his coach was at the door.
De Lancaster entered into no farther explanations, and his awkward guest
surrendered himself to the guidance of a coachman luckily not quite so
tipsey as his master.




CHAPTER II.

_Conversation in a Library._


When the wheels of Sir Owen’s coach had ceased from rattling over the
flinty pavement of the castle court, Robert De Lancaster glanced his
eyes round the room, and in a corner of it discovered his son Philip,
unnoticed of him before. Neither the cataract and confusion, that had
ensued upon Sir Owen’s tumble, nor the screams of a lady, in whose
safety he might be presumed to have some interest, had provoked this
disciple of Harpocrates to violate his taciturnity, or to stir from his
seat. At the same instant Colonel Wilson, a friend of the family,
entered, and brought tidings from the runners in the service of Mr.
Llewellyn, that things above stairs were going on as well as could be
expected.

Then with your leave, Colonel, said the lord of the castle, we will
adjourn to my library, and there await the event. Upon the word Philip
started from his corner, ran to the door and held it open for his
father. A silent bow was interchanged at passing; the library was near
at hand: the chairs were set ready, the candles lighted and the three
gentlemen arranged themselves round the fire in their customary seats.

I think, said De Lancaster, addressing himself to the colonel, amongst
all the extravagancies I have been betrayed into, there is none that
sits so light upon my conscience, as the passion I have had for
collecting books.

They certainly are a source of pleasure, said the colonel, to the
readers of them.

They cause great trouble to the writers, Philip answered in an under
voice, as if talking to himself.

Colonel Wilson was a disabled officer, having lost a leg in the service,
and had now retired upon a sinecure government of twenty shillings per
day to a small patrimonial estate in the near neighbourhood of Kray
Castle: he was a few years younger than Robert De Lancaster, who had
now kept his sixtieth birthday. Wilson had two sons; the elder was in
the army, and the younger at the head of Westminster school: he was a
man of strict probity, good understanding and an excellent heart. These
were qualities, which De Lancaster knew how to appreciate as well as any
man, and though his studies and pursuits had been widely different from
those of the Colonel, yet he courted his company, and lived in perfect
harmony with him as his friend and neighbour. Wilson on his part was not
blind to the eccentricities of De Lancaster, but as they never disagreed
except upon points, that did not interest the passions, their disputes
were carried on without any mixture of acrimony, and only served to keep
the conversation amicably alive.

Wilson had lived in the world; De Lancaster in study and retirement: the
latter would sometimes contend against assumptions, which to the former
appeared to be little less than self-evident; in the mean time De
Lancaster would oftentimes undertake to demonstrate paradoxes, that to
Wilson’s unsophisticated understanding seemed perfectly inexplicable:
these he was in the habit neither to admit, nor pertinaciously to
contest: if he had done the first, there would have been a speedy end to
the discussion; if he had pursued the latter course, there would have
been no end at all, for De Lancaster was not often in the humour to
recede from his positions.

Philip De Lancaster on the contrary believed all things, and examined
none: he was a man of great faith and few words; by no means wanting in
curiosity, but extremely averse from enquiry and trouble. Being an only
son and heir to the wealthy house of De Lancaster, it was thought
adviseable by the fathers on each side, who were the contracting
parties, that he should take to wife Matilda, only child of old Morgan
of Glen-Morgan, and presumptive heiress to his fortune and estate.
Philip, who had shewn no ardour as a lover, was by no means remarkably
uxorious as a husband; and Matilda did not molest him with her fondness
or attentions: They lived in the same house as appurtenances to the
family at Kray Castle, (for such from time immemorial had been the
custom of the De Lancasters) and they lived without quarrelling; for
they were very little together; their passions were never roused by
contradiction, or enflamed by jealousy; the husband had no attachments,
and the wife, who was said to have been thwarted in her first love, laid
herself out for no future admirers.

These few preliminary remarks may probably account for the placidity,
with which Philip now sate down in the library between his father and
the colonel to wait the issue of an event, in which if he did not
manifest a very lively interest, the reason very probably was, because
he did not feel it.

Philip, (if his sage remark is in the recollection of the reader) had
risqued a truism, when he modestly suggested that it was a troublesome
task to write a book. Philip did not speak this from his own experience;
therefore it is, that I call his truism a risque, for it was not always
that his father gave his passport to assertions of that character; but
the learned gentleman’s thoughts were just then employed not upon the
trouble, that we take when we bring our works into the world, but the
trouble, which we give, when we ourselves are brought into it, and upon
this topic he began to descant, as follows.

The unlucky accident, by which my blundering neighbour has precipitated
Mrs. De Lancaster into labour-pains, must in all probability tend to
aggravate and enhance those sorrows, in which by the condition of her
sex she is destined to bring forth; and indeed, independent of that
accident, I should not wonder if the pains she suffers, and the screams
she utters, were more than ordinarily acute and piercing, planted as she
now is, by adoption into my family, in the very stream and current from
the fountain head of the primæval curse--

Whereabouts are we now, said the colonel within himself?

--Nevertheless, under the pressure of these apprehensions, I console
myself with the reflection, that if the general observation, that what
we produce with difficulty we are thereby influenced to preserve with
diligence, be true in all other cases, it will be also true in that of
child-bearing. If so, we may expect that the _storgee_, or natural
affection of my daughter-in-law towards her infant will be
proportionally greater than that of mothers, who shall have had easier
times.

I see no grounds for that conclusion, replied the colonel.

Surely, sir, resumed De Lancaster, you must have remarked, that in all
our operations, whether mental or manual, we are naturally most attached
to those on which most pains and labour have been expended. Slight
performances and slight opinions may be easily given up, but where great
deliberation has been bestowed, we are not soon persuaded to admit that
our time has been misspent and our talents misapplied.

Certainly, replied Wilson, there are some points, upon which we ought
not to waver in our opinions, but there are many others, which it is not
worth our while to be too pertinacious in defending. In my profession we
must not quarrel with men for their caprices, so long as they are not
mischievously or impiously eccentric. It is not often we can find a
mess-room in the same way of thinking, except upon the question of
another bottle.

In your profession, my good friend, resumed De Lancaster, (for which I
have all possible respect) the pliability you describe may be perfectly
in character, and much to be commended; for where differences are to be
adjusted by arguments, swords should not be admitted into the
conference. In my system of life I see no reason why I should be bound
to think with the majority; nay, I confess to you I am very ill inclined
to subscribe to popular opinions, unless upon strict investigation.

Are they always worth it? said the colonel.

I should think not, echoed Philip.

Pardon me, exclaimed De Lancaster! So many things are assumed without
being examined, and so many disbelieved without being disproved, that I
am not hasty to assent or dissent in compliment to the multitude; and on
this account perhaps I am considered as a man affecting singularity: I
hope I am not to be found guilty of that idle affectation, only because
I would not be a dealer in opinions, which I have not weighed before I
deliver them out. Above all things I would not traffic in conjectures,
but carefully avoid imposing upon others or myself by confident
anticipation, when nothing can be affirmed with certainty in this mortal
state of chance and change, that is not grounded on conviction; for
instance, in the case of the lady above stairs, whose situation keeps
our hopes and fears upon the balance, our presumption is, that Mrs. De
Lancaster shall be delivered of a child, either male or female, and in
all respects like other children--

I confess, said Wilson, that is my presumption, and I should be most
outrageously astonished, should it happen otherwise.

I don’t think it likely, murmured Philip.

No, no, no, replied De Lancaster; but we need not be reminded how many
præternatural and prodigious births have occurred and been recorded in
the annals of mankind. Whether the natives of the town of Stroud near
Rochester are to this day under the ban of Thomas a Becket I am not
informed; but when, in contempt of that holy person, they wantonly cut
off the tail of his mule as he rode through their street, you have it
from authority that every child thenceforward born to an inhabitant of
Stroud was punished by the appendage of an incommodious and enormous
tail, exactly corresponding with that, which had been amputated from
the archbishop’s mule.

Here a whistle from the colonel struck the auditory nerves of Philip,
who, gently laying his hand upon his stump, gravely reminded him that
Becket was a saint--

De Lancaster proceeded--- What then shall we say of the famous Martin
Luther, who being ordained to act so conspicuous a part in opposition to
the papal power, came into the world fully equipped for controversy; his
mother being delivered of her infant, (wonderful to relate) habited in
all points as a theologian, and (which I conceive must have sensibly
incommoded her) wearing a square cap on his head, according to academic
costuma. This, Colonel Wilson, may perhaps appear to you, as no doubt
it did to the midwife and all present at his birth, as a very
extraordinary and præternatural circumstance.

It does indeed appear so, said the colonel. I know you don’t invent the
fable; I should like to know your authority for it.

My authority, replied De Lancaster, in this case is the same as in that
of Becket’s mule; Martinus Delrius is my authority for both; and when we
find this gravely set forth by a writer of such high dignity and credit,
himself a doctor of theology, and public professor of the Holy
Scriptures in the university of Salamanca, who is bold enough to
question it?

I am not bold enough to believe it, said Wilson.




CHAPTER III.

_An Accession to the ancient Family of De Lancaster._


When the good man of the house perceived that the Salamanca doctor and
his anecdotes only moved the ridicule of his friend Wilson, and even
staggered the credulity of his son Philip, he pursued the subject no
further, but wearied with the exertions and agitations of the day leaned
back in his easy chair, and fell asleep. The parties, that were still
awake, seemed mutually disposed to enjoy their meditations in silence,
till upon the Castle clock’s striking eleven, Philip appositely remarked
that it wanted but an hour to twelve--

And then, said Wilson, the first of March will have become the second of
March, so that if your boy don’t make haste into the world, saint
David’s day will be over, and he will not have the privilege of being
born with a leek in his bonnet, and Martin Luther will keep the field of
wonders to himself.

The story is very extraordinary, said Philip; but do you think it is
true?

Do I think it is true, replied Wilson, that this gentleman, (pointing to
a picture over the chimney) whom I take to be Icarus, came into the
world, as the painter has described him, with his wings at full stretch?
If you can give credit to the one, you may believe the other.

I think the safest way is to believe neither, Philip observed; but the
gentleman you point at is not what you suppose: I believe he is some
King: It is a family piece, and my father can explain it to you.

That I will do directly, cried the father, who had waked just in time to
hear what his son had been saying. The personage you enquire about is
not Icarus, but King Bladud of unfortunate memory, and the incident
being historically connected with the records of my family, I have had
the picture cleaned and repaired, and conspicuously hung, as you see,
over the chimney piece of my library. He with the wings is, as I told
you, King Bladud: He has miscarried in his experiment, and fallen to the
ground from the topmost pinnacle of the Temple of Apollo. The venerable
old man in the sacerdotal habit is the priest of Apollo, and the
Philosopher in the saffron-coloured mantle is my ancestor, the ingenious
contriver of the unlucky pinions. From him it is I date the privilege of
attaching wings to my more ancient bearing of the Harp, as you see it
displayed on the banners in the hall, and in sundry other parts of the
castle, with the appropriate motto underwritten--DUM CŒLUM PETO, CANTUM
EDO.

Thank you, my good sir, said the colonel: I am perfectly satisfied. For
my own part I am contented to exhibit three cockle-shells on the handles
of my spoons, but where I picked them up, and how I came by them, I know
no more than the man in the moon, nor care.

At this instant Cecilia entered the room, and, running up to her father,
joyfully announced the welcome entrance of our hero on this mortal stage
in the character of a lovely boy, adding in the usual phrase that the
mother was quite as well as could be expected.

I rejoice to hear it; I rejoice to hear it, exclaimed the grandfather.
But, my dear Cecilia, are you quite certain that it is a boy?

Dear sir, replied Cecilia, you wont suppose the people about my sister
can be deceived as to that.

Why no, said De Lancaster, upon better recollection I presume they
cannot.

Cecilia directed a congratulatory look to her brother, and nodding to
him, as she left the room, said, I give you joy, Philip, I give you joy
with all my heart. Philip received it with many thanks, and entertained
it with much composure.

Reach me the family bible, son, said De Lancaster, and looked at his
watch, observing that it wanted half an hour of midnight. He thereupon
entered the day and hour of his grandson’s birth in the recording leaf
of the aforesaid holy book; observing, that he would postpone engrossing
the event into his pedigree roll till his attorney could attend for that
purpose--I confess, added he, it is more properly the office of my bard
David Williams, but as he, poor man, is blind, I shall wink at his
excusing himself from that branch of his duty.

I don’t see how you can well do less, said the colonel.

He will be christened John, continued the old gentleman, not attending
to the colonel’s remark: the links in the chain of my genealogy have
long been distinguished by the alternate names of John, Robert and
Philip, and the brightest of the three has fallen to his turn. The Johns
have been the heroes of the family: That was my father’s name; he was a
gentleman of the most punctilious honour, but he was killed in a duel
with a foreign officer, who happened to tread upon the train of my
mother’s gown in a ball-room. The Philips universally, without the
exception of my worthy son here present, have been lovers of their ease,
and my great-grandfather was very generally distinguished by the style
and title of Robert the Philologist: by manuscripts, which are now in my
possession, it appears, that he had been at considerable pains and study
in writing comments and annotations for a new and splendid edition of
the _Incredibilia_ of Palæphatus: This he did not live to complete, but
he is said more than once to have declared, that he would convince the
world, that Palæphatus told many more truths than he himself was aware
of.

Perhaps Palæphatus atoned for it, said the colonel, by telling many
untruths, that he was aware of;--but is it not time to go to bed?




CHAPTER IV.

_Our Hero pays his first Visit to his Grandfather. The congratulatory
Lay of the Minstrel._


The next morning Robert de Lancaster rose with the sun. From the window
of his chamber he cast his eyes over that grand and beautiful expanse of
country, which the proud and lofty site of his castle overpeered. It was
the first sun, that had risen on his new-born hope, and the splendour,
which that glorious luminary diffused over the animating scenery under
his survey, was to a mind like his peculiarly auspicious and impressive:
his bosom glowed with pious gratitude to the Supreme Dispenser of those
blessings--It is too much, all-bounteous Being, he exclaimed, too much
for sinful man! I am not worthy of such goodness.

He summoned his servant, and being informed that the night had passed
well with Mrs. De Lancaster, he desired the child might be brought to
him: his wish was speedily obeyed. He stood for some time intently
gazing on the countenance of his grandchild, and at length pronounced it
to be a perfect model of infantine beauty, open and ingenuous, every
thing in short that his warmest wishes could have pictured.

I perceive, cried he, and can decypher the hand-writing of nature in the
expressive lineaments of this lovely babe: if God, who gave him life,
shall in his mercy give him length of days, he will be an honour to his
name and an ornament to his country.

He is a sweet pretty puppet, said the nurse.

Pooh! cried the prophet, I am not speaking of what he is, I am telling
what he will be. I prognosticate that he will be brave, benevolent, and
virtuous--

And handsome and tall and well-shaped, re-echoed the loquacious dame;
only look what fine straight limbs he has, pretty fellow!

Take yourself away with him! cried De Lancaster in displeasure. You have
interrupted me with your chatter, and the continuity of those thoughts,
which spontaneously presented themselves, is no more to be resumed.

The nurse departed, dancing the child in her arms, and prattling to it
in her way, unconscious of the offence she had committed, whilst De
Lancaster, pacing up and down his room, in vain attempted to find that
place in the book of fate, from which her untimely gabble had caused him
to break off--It is lost, said he to himself; I can only discern bright
gleams of virtuous happiness, but not unclouded, not without those
darkening shadows, that denounce misfortune.--Heaven forbid my father’s
fate should be this infant’s portion with my father’s name!

He ceased; sate down, and, whilst the tear hung on his cheek, silently
put up an unpremeditated prayer.

It was his custom every morning after he had dressed himself for the day
to be attended by his bard David Williams, and it was now the hour for
the old man to present himself with his harp at the door of his patron’s
chamber: whilst he was in it, all approach was interdicted; the mind of
De Lancaster seemed in a peculiar manner to sympathize with the melody
of the harp: he had not only a national predilection for that instrument
in common with his countrymen of the principality, but professed an
hereditary attachment to it as a true De Lancaster, whose ancestors had
worn it on their shields from the days of King Bardus. He had now heard
the signal, that announced the morning visit of his minstrel, but a
doubt struck him whether he could admit him to perform without hazarding
an infringement upon his own order for general silence throughout the
castle, as recommended by the sage Llewellyn: whilst pausing upon this
dilemma it luckily occurred to his recollection, that there was a piano
as well as a forte upon his favourite instrument, and furthermore, that
the apartment of his daughter-in-law was at the greatest possible
distance from his own; balancing these considerations in his mind, the
good man became satisfied upon the point in doubt so far, that David was
allowed to enter, and perform his morning serenade under suitable
restrictions.

There was a stool, on which Williams always sate during his
performances, and an easy chair, in which the patron reposed himself,
and indulged his silent meditations. By signals audibly given, on the
arms of the aforesaid chair the blind musician was directed to modulate
the character and spirit of his movements, so as to correspond and
accord with the movements of the hearer’s mind. It was a communication
without language, perfectly well understood by the performer, who no
sooner heard the signal for soft music than he began a prelude so
exquisitely tender, that the strings only whispered under his fingers,
till at length being filled with the inspiration of his muse, he broke
forth extemporaneously into the following strains--

    “Shine forth, bright sun, and gild the day,
    “That greets our new-born hope with light!
    “Give me to feel thy cheering ray,
    “Tho’ these dark orbs are wrapt in night.

    “Yet Heav’n in pity hath allow’d
    “These hands to wake the tuneful string,
    “The muse her influence hath bestow’d,
    “And taught her sightless bard to sing.

    “Sound then, my harp, thy softest strain,
    “Melodious solace of the blind!
    “Airs, that may heal a mother’s pain,
    “And sooth a father’s anxious mind!

    “Hush, hush! for now the infant sleeps--
    “Let no rude string disturb its rest;
    “And lo! instinctively it creeps
    “To nestle at its parent breast.

    “Ah luckless me! these curtain’d eyes
    “Shall never view its lovely face;
    “I ne’er must see that star arise,
    “The day-spring of an ancient race.

    “Father of life, in mercy take
    “This infant to thy nursing care,
    “And for the virtuous grandsire’s sake
    “Oh! hear the humble minstrel’s pray’r!

    “Grant that this babe, as yet the last
    “Of Lancaster’s time-honour’d name,
    “When coming ages shall have past,
    “May rank amongst the first in fame!”

Thou hast sung well, David Williams, said the patron, as soon as the
harp had ceased, and I command thee to accept, and wear upon thy finger,
this antique beryl, upon which is engraved a head of the poet Homer, thy
prototype in melody not less than in misfortune. Thy muse, old man,
hath not been unpropitious: go thy way therefore, and cherish thy spirit
with the best flask of metheglin, that my cellars afford. I know it is
thy favourite Helicon, which at once gives nerves to thy fingers, and
nourishment to thy fancy. Get thee hence, blind bard, and be merry!

Old David devoutly drew the ring on his finger, and with a profound
obeisance replied--I thank you and I bless you, my munificent patron. I
will drink prosperity to the illustrious house of De Lancaster and the
new-born heir thereof. It has stood from the time when the old world was
deluged, may it stand till the time when the new one shall be dissolved!

With these words David took his leave and departed, whilst De Lancaster,
glowing with that pure sensation of refined delight, which music can
convey to its admirers, and blest in having now recruited his pedigree
with a new descendant from the loins of Noah, sallied forth for the
breakfast room, displaying on his stately person a new suit, after an
old fashion, of flaming full-trimmed scarlet, ornamented with enormous
gold-worked buttons, plentifully dispersed; a prodigious flowing
perriwig of natural hair sable as the raven’s plume, with rolled silk
stockings and high-topped square-toed shoes, which, resounding upon
every step of the oaken stairs as he descended, gave loud and early
notice of his approach to the personages assembled to receive him.

Cecilia, Philip and Colonel Wilson in turn presented themselves, and
received his cordial embrace, for in his heart nature had implanted all
the warm affections of father and of friend, and in courtesy of manners
he was a sample of the chivalric ages; Llewellyn therefore was by no
means overlooked; his services were both highly praised, and liberally
repaid. Lawyer Davis also attended, being summoned for the purpose of
the enrolment. So many were the messages of enquiry from the neighbours
round the castle, that almost every servant and retainer belonging to
his houshold made an errand to present themselves and pay homage to
their good old master. Had pen, ink and paper been called for, there
would have been three domestics to have brought them in: in the mean
while it may be presumed that the more than usually profound respect,
with which they accompanied their devoirs, was in some degree owing to
the awe they were impressed with by the splendor, in which they saw him
now arrayed; and certain it is, if they needed any pardon for this
excess of reverence towards a mortal like themselves, the stately person
and commanding countenance of Robert De Lancaster were exactly such, as
in their predicament might serve for an apology: his stature was of the
tallest, but well-proportioned and erect; his frame athletic, but
without a trace of clumsiness or vulgarity; his voice, his action, his
address were all of that character, which seemed peculiarly adapted to
impose respect. Colonel Wilson, who had got secret intimation of this
brilliant sortie, which his friend was about to make, had brushed up his
epaulets, and turned out in full uniform for the occasion.

Not so Sir Owen ap Owen, baronet, of Penruth Abbey, who, having been
told of the event as he had just turned his hounds into cover, instantly
galloped off to Kray Castle; and being now ushered into the room in his
hunting jacket and boots, exhibited a figure, which both in dress and
address was as perfect a contrast to that we have been describing, as
reality could present, or imagination feign.

Cecilia took an early opportunity of saying she was upon duty and
withdrew: the rest of the company fell off one and one, and Sir Owen
found himself left with Mr. De Lancaster.

What ensued will be related in the following chapter.




CHAPTER V.

_An importunate Visitor interrupts the Business of the Morning._


It must be obvious to the well-bred reader, that this visit of Sir Owen
to the worthy owner of Kray Castle, though not exactly in form, was
nevertheless not out of place, considering what had passed in the
antecedent day. We may literally say that it was made upon the spur of
the occasion, and this we hope will be an apology for our introducing
the baronet in boots. Without doubt he was conscious that something more
was due from him than a simple enquiry could acquit him of, but the
happy turn things had taken, since his head came to the floor and our
hero into the world, relieved him in great part from his embarrassment:
the politeness of De Lancaster put him entirely at his ease, when
turning to Sir Owen, he said--I think, my good neighbour, as I am
indebted to you on my boy’s account for his early introduction into
life, there is nothing wanting to complete the favour but that you
should take some charge of him, now he is with us, and stand godfather
at the christening.

To this the baronet made answer, that he should be ready to obey the
call, and was greatly flattered by it, adding with a significant smile,
that it was not his fault, if he had not by this time had the honour of
standing in a nearer relation to a grandson of Mr. De Lancaster than
that of godfather; to which the other as readily replied--Neither was it
his fault.

This was so fair an opening, that Sir Owen could not miss it, and _upon
this hint he spake_. His speech, though not remarkable for its
eloquence, was extremely easy to be understood: he professed a very
sincere esteem and high respect for the amiable Cecilia: he would make a
very handsome settlement upon her, and add two horses to complete his
set, so that she should command her coach and six; he would new set the
family jewels, furnish the best apartments afresh, and build her a
conservatory: he would leave off smoking, take to tea in an afternoon,
and learn quadrille: he would move the dog-kennel to a greater distance
from his house, that the hounds might not wake her in a morning: he
would stand candidate for the county at the next election, and as soon
as he had taken his seat in parliament, and overturned the present
ministry, he did not doubt of being made a lord. He said he was well
aware of the lady’s high pretensions on the score of pedigree, but he
flattered himself he should have something to say on that head, when he
had looked into matters, and refreshed his memory; this he knew for a
fact--that old Robin ap Rees, his minstrel, had records to prove that
his ancestors, the Ap Owens, were not drowned in the general deluge, but
saved themselves with their goats on the tops of their mountains in
Merionethshire; and this should be made appear to the satisfaction of
Cecilia as clear as the sun at noon-day: he added in conclusion, that as
a mark of his respect for the name of De Lancaster, his second son
should bear it jointly with his own, coupled with another _ap_.

These proposals being submitted, he wished to know if there was any
thing more, that could be required of him for the satisfaction and
content of the lady he aspired to. To this Robert De Lancaster gravely
answered, that certainly there was nothing wanting to complete his
wishes but her consent.

Why that is what I have always intimated to her, cried the baronet, that
she had nothing to do but to say yes, and I was ready to strike hands
upon the word and clinch the bargain. When a thing can so easily be set
to rights, it is rather surprising to me, that she can hesitate about
it.

Upon De Lancaster’s dropping a hint as to the seriousness of an
engagement for life, and that two opinions must coincide upon that
measure, Sir Owen very appositely observed, that it was mere loss of
time to spin out a business year after year, that could be finished in a
single minute.

I grant you, my good friend, said De Lancaster, that Cecilia could do
more towards settling this affair in the space of one minute than you
and I could do in a twelvemonth, for she is absolutely her own mistress;
therefore with your leave we will turn it over to her, and when I have
next the honour to see you, I will engage you shall have an answer from
her own lips: let me only request you to receive that answer as
decisive, be it what it may; and for your own as well as for her repose
stir the question no more.

So let it be! replied Sir Owen, and fit it is that so it should be; for,
take notice, I am getting on all this while, and she is not standing
still in life, so that for the sake of posterity we had best lose no
more time about it. If it is to be, the sooner it is done the better;
if it is not, why there must be an end of it; I must turn my horse’s
head, as they say, another way; and that puts me in mind that I have
left the hounds in cover, and, if they find, I shall be quite and clean
thrown out.

Nothing in this life more likely, replied old Robert archly, and with
this answer, which cut two ways at once, the baronet, who just then
thought of nothing but his hounds, bustled out of the room, muttering to
himself--Huntsman will wonder what, the plague, has become of me.




CHAPTER VI.

_Some Men are more fond of telling long Stories than others are of
listening to them._


When this inauspicious conference was over, and the subject matter left,
in the diplomatic phrase, _ad referendum_, Robert de Lancaster, who was
anxious to dispatch the more interesting business of the day, rang the
bell for his servant, and by him was informed that all parties were in
readiness to attend him to the audit-room, where, amongst other family
treasures, the record of his pedigree was kept in a vaulted casemate so
fortified, as to bid defiance both to force and fire.

Accompanied by Cecilia, Philip, Wilson and Lawyer Davis, followed by the
nurse carrying the infant, and Williams, in his bardal habit, led by a
venerable domestic out of livery, he proceeded to the spot, and with his
own hands liberated the incarcerated roll. It was a splendid record, and
when spread out at full length exhibited several figures gaudily
emblazoned. Colonel Wilson, who had no great respect at heart, but much
gravity of countenance, whilst these ceremonials were in operation,
addressing himself to the master of the show, said--It is well, my good
friend, that you have stage room enough to display this fine
spectacle in perfection without putting any of your ancestors to
inconvenience--Then passing along till he came to the upper end of the
roll, where Japheth, son of Noah, conspicuously kept his post, and
pointing to a figure on the step next below him, he gravely asked who
that majestic personage might be in kingly robes, wearing a crown on
his head, and carrying a sceptre in his hand: Robert De Lancaster as
gravely replied, that it was Samothes, the first sovereign monarch of
this island, from him called Samothea.--Wilson bowed, and obtruded no
more questions.

Whilst the ceremony of enrolment was in process--I record this infant,
said the grandfather, by the name of John, although he hath not yet
received the sacred rite of baptism, forasmuch as the _pronomina_ of
John, Robert and Philip have been successively adopted by my family from
the very earliest time of the Christian æra to the present--Write him
down therefore by the name of John.

This being done in proper form by Lawyer Davis, and date annexed, blind
Williams gave a crowning twang upon his harp (for I omitted to premise
that he brought it with him) and in a loud and solemn tone chanted
forth--FLOREAT!--when our hero (unwillingly I record it to his shame)
set up such a dismal and most dolorous howl, as startled all the
hearers, but most of all his grandfather, who, struck with horror, cried
out to the nurse--Take him away, take him instantly away! Why would you
let him roar at this unlucky moment?--Bless your honour, said the
prating gossip, ’tis a sign of strength--A sign! repeated the sage; how
should you know of what it is a sign? Away with him at once! I would it
had not happened.

As the cavalcade now marched away in solemn silence, Colonel Wilson,
halting on his wooden leg, whispered to Lawyer Davis, who was in the
rear--This is ridiculous enough, friend Davis, we must fairly confess;
but the harmless foibles of good and worthy men should not expose them
to our contempt.

Amongst the many oddities (for I am loth to call them absurdities) that
marked the character of Robert de Lancaster, his pride of pedigree was
one of the most prominent and most open to ridicule. That his friend
Colonel Wilson saw it in this light there is no doubt; yet although he
was quite intolerant enough towards many of Robert’s eccentricities upon
speculative points, in this favourite folly he left him undisturbed,
perceiving, as we may suppose, that it was a prejudice not to be
attacked but at the risque of his friendship. This topic therefore had
never come into discussion, and even the history of the picture, lately
brought out of obscurity, was, as we have before observed, new to the
incurious colonel. He had seen the pedigree unrolled for the first
time, but of its contents he knew no more than what his single question
about King Samothes had drawn from De Lancaster in the way of
explanation.

If Wilson acquiesced in this foible of his friend, none else amongst the
numbers, that were in habits of acquaintance with the family, were
likely to start any question as to the antiquity of it; they were so
cordially welcomed, and so hospitably entertained at Kray Castle, that
it would have been hard indeed upon their host, if they could have
swallowed nothing at his table but the dinner, that he put upon it. Add
to this, that the good old man was a patient listener to other people’s
anecdotes, though a deliberate narrator of his own. For all those
dealers in the marvellous, who are proverbially said to shoot a long
bow, he had a great deal of companionable fellow-feeling, and as he did
not hold the commonly received opinions of the world in very high
respect, he had boldly put together and amassed a curious and elaborate
collection, somewhat after the manner of Coryat, of what he styled his
_Confutations of vulgar Errors_. These have come under the inspection of
some people since his death, and though it must be owned that they are
not to be read without some few grains of allowance, yet there is a
sufficiency of novelty to make them entertaining, and good sense enough
interspersed to render them in a certain degree respectable.

He there paradoxically asserts, (and I must believe it was his serious
opinion, for he was fond of repeating it amongst his intimates) that the
human understanding had been extremely narrowed and contracted, since
the art of printing had been discovered and carried into practice, for
that tradition was the mother of memory, and book-reading the murderer.
For modern history he had a sovereign contempt; he said it was a mass of
voluntary misrepresentations, and that no man could be trusted to write
the annals of his own time; strenuously contending, that it was from the
dark ages only we could strike out light to illuminate mankind. In the
early writers of the history of his own country he was profoundly
versed, and could adduce a host of authorities to prove that _Dominicus
Marius Niger_ and _Berosus_ were clearly warranted in their affirmations
that the island of Great Britain was as well and as fully stocked with
inhabitants long before the days of Noah, as any other country upon the
face of the globe.

Upon all these topics Wilson had not much to say: he knew his friend was
in the habit of disputing points, which others took for granted, and
taking many for granted, which by others were disputed; he was therefore
well contented to let him talk his fill so long as he was only talking
for fame, resolved on his own part to take no more for truth than he saw
fit; and, being always able to prove what he himself asserted, what he
heard asserted without proof he did not hold himself always bound to
believe.

He now perceived the time was come, when it would be no longer in his
power to parry the propensity so discoverable in his friend on this
occasion to treat him with a discussion on the antiquity of his family:
he was prepared to meet it, nay, he was just now disposed even to invite
it by some leading questions respecting the family bards, and the
authenticity of the facts by them recorded.

This was every thing that De Lancaster could wish for: it was at once a
salvo for his vanity, and a challenge to his veracity. Assuming
thereupon a more than ordinary degree of solemnity, he said--It is not
to the bards alone that I am indebted for all I know of those, who have
borne my name before I was in the world, though much is due to their
correct and faithful records of the times they lived in. By my own
perseverance in keeping hold of the clue, which, by the help of _Joannes
Bodinus_, _Franciscus Tarapha_, _Wolfangus Lazius_, and other equally
illustrious authorities, hath led me to the fountain head of my
genealogy, I have at this moment the consolation to reflect, that when
that most incomparable personage Samothes, (first son of Japhet, who was
third son of Noah) was monarch, patriarch and legislator of this my
native island, I had an ancestor then living in it, who shared the
blessings of his government, was also nearly allied to him, and stood so
high in his favour and confidence, as to be appointed president and
chief teacher of theology in that celebrated college of philosophers
called Samothei, which both _Aristotle_ and _Secion_ affirm to have been
established in the days of this good king, and so called in honour of
his name: but not this school only, the whole island took its name after
this excellent king, and was for a course of years, till the arrival of
Albion, called Samothea, as both the learned _Bale_ and _Doctor Caius_
concur in affirming--but perhaps to you, Colonel Wilson, these anecdotes
may be uninteresting; and, if so, I will pass them over.

By no means, my good friend, replied the colonel, for be assured that
all these family facts, which you have collected, and Moses in his
history seems to have overlooked, are to me perfectly new and extremely
entertaining.

Sir, resumed the narrator, Samothes was succeeded by his son Magus, from
whom the Persian Magi derive--(Wilson arched his eye-brows, as men are
apt to do on certain occasions)--and Sarron succeeded Magus, from whom
were derived a sect of philosophers amongst the Celtes, called
Sarronides. In the reign of Druis, continued De Lancaster, or, as
_Seneca_ writes it, Dryus, (which I take to be a corruption) my
ancestors transplanted themselves, together with the philosophers,
named after their sovereign Druids, into the isle of Anglesea, which, as
_Humphry Lloyd_ truly observes, was their chief place of abode, or, more
properly speaking, their pontifical headquarters. Bardus, the son of
Druis, succeeded to his father, and in his reign so famous was my then
existing ancestor for his performances on the harp, that we have ever
since borne that instrument by royal grant of this king as our family
coat of arms and crest. Now, let it be observed, added he, that many
families have coats of arms and crests, and can’t tell how they came by
them.

That is true, said the colonel, and one of those am I; but I beg pardon
for interrupting you: I pray you to proceed.

After a period of three hundred and ten years, the Celtes being subdued
by Albion the giant, and this island subjected to his dominion, he
changed its name of Samothea to that of Albion. This same Albion the
giant was, as every body knows, the fourth son of Neptune--

I am proud to hear it, cried the colonel, but I protest to you it is the
first I ever heard of him, or any of his family: I can now account for
our superiority in naval affairs; and I most heartily hope that the
trident, which this son of Neptune inherited from his father, shall
never in any time to come be wrested from his posterity of this island.

I hope not, replied De Lancaster; but I proceed with my narrative--Upon
the landing of Brute with his Trojans, (which was not above three
thousand years ago) I find it asserted by _Master Henry Lyte of
Lytescarie_, that this island was no better than a rude and barren
wilderness, _ferarum altrix_, a nursery for wild beasts, as he
slightingly denominates it; but I must take leave to tell that learned
antiquary, that his history, which he proudly styles _The Light of
Britain_, might more properly be called The Libel upon Britain; for I
will neither give credit to his lions, which he presumes to say overran
the island, nor implicitly acquiesce in his monstrous white bulls, with
shagged manes and hairy foreheads, forasmuch as I find no mention of
them in our King Edward the First’s letters to Pope Boniface, wherein
this very point of the landing of Brute in Albion is very learnedly
discussed. As for his lions, I treat that fable with contempt, for,
besides that King Edward does not mention them, I will never believe
there could have been one in the whole island, else how came King
Madan, the grandson of this very Brute, to be killed and devoured by
wolves in a hunting match, when it has been notorious from all time,
that the wolf will fly from the hunter, that has anointed himself with
lion’s tallow? Will any man suppose that the royal sportsman could have
failed taking that obvious precaution, had there been but a single ounce
of the fat of that animal in the whole kingdom?

Nobody will suppose it, said Wilson, and I am satisfied there were no
lions for the reason you assign: I must beg leave to doubt also if there
was any authority for his enormous white bulls, provided you are quite
sure that King Edward does not hint at them in his correspondence with
the Pope: but have we not lost sight of your ancestors amongst these
lions and the bulls?

Not so, replied De Lancaster, for upon the partition, which Brute made
of the kingdom between his three sons Locrine, Camber and Albanact, my
family is found in the Cambrian district upon the very spot, where Kray
Castle now stands; which will warrant me in saying without vanity that
few land-holders in the island can boast a longer tenure in their
possessions, this being not above sixty-six years after the taking of
Troy, and eleven hundred thirty and two years before the Christian æra.

That is quite sufficient, said the colonel: few post-diluvian families
can produce a better title.




CHAPTER VII.

_The Narrative is interrupted by the Arrival of a Letter from old Morgan
of Glen Morgan._


It is not always the greatest misfortune, that can befal the listener to
a long story, if the teller shall chance to be called off in the middle
of it. This was just now the case with Robert De Lancaster, who had
advanced in his narrative but a very few years on this side of the
Trojan war, when the arrival of the servant, whom he had dispatched with
his letter of congratulation to old Morgan of Glen-Morgan, cut him short
in his progress, and it probably required as much philosophy on his part
to command his patience, as it did on Wilson’s to conceal his pleasure.

However this might be, De Lancaster upon the receipt of Morgan’s answer
to his letter, came to an immediate pause in his story, and leaving
about three thousand years of his pedigree as yet unaccounted for, read
as follows--

            “Dear Sir,

     “Your servant duly delivered your kind letter, informing me, that
     my daughter Mrs. Philip De Lancaster was safely delivered of a son;
     an event, which I hope will afford much consolation to you, and be
     the happy means of delivering down to future generations a name,
     which from time immemorial has been highly respectable in these
     parts.

     “To my name as one of the sponsors at the christening you have an
     undoubted right, and I am flattered that you enforce it; but of my
     personal attendance upon that solemnity there is I fear but little
     chance; for I am a victim to the gout, and though the snow, which
     now lies on the hills, may disappear before the month is out, I
     cannot expect my pains will be in the like melting mood: but He,
     who is the disposer of all things, will dispose even of such a
     wretched insignificant as I am.

     “Alas! my good brother-in-law, I am not like you a healthy, gay and
     social man; I am gloomy, sullen and uncomfortable; hypochondriac by
     nature, and splenetic by vexation and disease: I will not say that
     I repent that ever I was a father; that would be wrong; but I do
     say, that, being a father, I repent of my unfitness, and am
     conscious of my errors.

     “One only child, whom we jointly call our daughter, was all that
     Providence entrusted to me: her mother died when she was an
     infant, and I never ventured on a second marriage. I did not seek
     for teachers to instruct me how to educate my child: I took that
     task upon myself, and was her only master: I coveted not to
     accomplish her as a fine lady; I studied to implant good principles
     in her heart, and make her an honest, honourable woman. I suspect
     my discipline was too rigid, for I totally overlooked amusement,
     and fixed a melancholy upon her spirit, accompanied with so
     absolute a submission to my dictates, that she seemed to think and
     act without any will or option of her own.

     “When you tendered to me your alliance, I embraced it with ardour;
     for I held your character then, as I do to this day, in the highest
     honour and respect. Had ambition been my ruling passion, I could
     have looked up to nothing in point of family of superior dignity;
     had avarice been my vice, how could I have gratified it more than
     by marrying my daughter to the only son and heir of De Lancaster?
     Your son was comely, courteous, unassuming, and though perhaps not
     prominently marked with any brilliant gleams of genius, yet
     certainly in moral purity no young man bore a more unblemished
     character. I recommended the connection to my daughter--warmly,
     anxiously recommended it--Implicitly, without appeal, in a concern
     the most material she accorded to my wish, and answered at the
     altar to the awful question there repeated as compliantly as she
     did, when I first proposed it to her.

     “Now, sir, when I disclose to you that this too duteous creature
     had conceived a passion, which under the terror of my authority
     she had not courage to discover, judge what my sorrow and remorse
     must be. I have, though unintentionally, made a wreck of her peace,
     and endangered that of your son. I may have brought into your
     family a wife without a heart for her husband, and a mother, (which
     Heaven avert!) without natural affection for her offspring.

     “Thus I have laid the sorrows of my soul before you, and beseech
     you, that, with the candour and benignity, which are natural to
     you, you would look upon my child, and without revealing my secret
     to your son, influence him to be mild with her, in her present
     situation more especially; and this I am confident will engage her
     gratitude, though I dare not promise if will gain her love.

     “I was about to conclude with my love and blessing to the mother
     and her babe, but upon reading over what in the confusion of my
     thoughts I have so ill put together, I find I have omitted to tell
     you, who the young man is, of whom I have been speaking. His name
     is Jones, a gentleman by birth, but destitute of fortune. He was
     ensign, and on a recruiting party at Denbigh, where I noticed him
     for his modest manners and engaging person; having withal known his
     father Colonel Jones, and served with him in the same regiment when
     I was in the army, I invited this youth to make my house his
     quarters, became very fond of him, and furnished him with means to
     purchase a lieutenancy. I have nothing to charge him with; his
     conduct towards my daughter was honourable in the extreme, and I am
     informed that it was his punctilious delicacy towards me as his
     patron, that occasioned him to secede, when she probably would have
     summoned resolution to have laid the state of her heart before me;
     which had she done, if I know myself, I know she would have had her
     lover, and Jones would have had my estate.

              I have the honour to be,
                    Dear Sir, &c. &c.
                             JOHN MORGAN.”

The perusal of this melancholy letter made a deep impression on the
feeling heart of De Lancaster: he pondered on its contents for some
time, and began to arrange his thoughts for answering it in a
consolatory manner. When he had written a few lines, he laid down his
pen, and said within himself--How much better might all this be stated
face to face in person than upon paper! He is ill, poor man, and unable
to come to me; I am in health, and will go to him; he cannot fail to
take my visit kindly, and the face of a friend is cheering, when the
spirits are depressed. I will act towards him, as I, in his
circumstances, should wish and expect him to act towards me. It is but
about four hours drive, and I can be home the next morning: if the roads
are passable, ’twill be a pleasant jaunt, for the weather is now fine,
and promises a fair day to-morrow.

Having settled this point to his kind heart’s content, the good man rang
his bell, and summoned his servant, who had been to Glen-Morgan, to make
his report of the roads.

Were they practicable for the coach to pass with safety? The coach
might pass in perfect safety, for though the snow laid on the
mountains, the road was clear, and he saw no danger. The report was
satisfactory; the servant was dismissed, and the coachman summoned: upon
enquiry made as to matters within his department, every thing thereunto
appertaining, horses and carriage, were ready for the start. Cecilia was
now called into council, and the important project was announced to her:
It occasioned some surprise to her at first on account of its uncommon
spirit and vivacity, but she gave it no opposition, nor even moved the
previous question--The kindness of the motive, and care for her dear
father’s safety, occupied her gentle thoughts:--Were the roads safe, and
would he go alone? The roads were safe, and as he wished to have some
private talk with his brother Morgan upon family affairs, he would go
alone, and return to her on the next day.

It was resolved: the grand affair was settled: the solemn fiat was
announced; the note of preparation was sounded through all the lower
regions of the castle, and echoed through the range of stables--Our
master goes to-morrow to Glen-Morgan, and will stay out a whole night!

When tidings of this extraordinary event were announced to Colonel
Wilson, he was in the common parlour, and had sate down to chess with
Mr. Philip De Lancaster, who took much content in that narcotic game, of
which however he scarce understood a single principle. Going to
Glen-Morgan, cried Wilson! this is news indeed: I am astonished.--I am
cheque-mated, said Philip; I cannot move a man.--By Heavens! but I am
moved with pleasure and surprise, exclaimed Wilson, to hear that your
good father meditates a visit to Glen-Morgan.--It is not above twenty
miles, said the other, and the coach is easy; he may sleep in it all the
way.--The devil he may, rejoined Wilson: You might as well expect the
coachman to fall asleep.--That is not impossible, said Philip, he is
very fat and drowsy. But now I think of it, I’ll go and angle for some
perch: I shall like to send my father-in-law a few fish of my own
catching.

Do so, cried Wilson: you can stand still and catch them.--With these
words he stumped out of the room, and turning into the library, where De
Lancaster was sitting--I come to congratulate you, said he, as he
entered, upon the resolution you have taken. It will warm the heart of
my old friend Morgan to be flattered with a visit from the man in all
the world he most esteems and honours.

If it will give him any pleasure, I shall not regret my pains.

It will, be assured, repeated Wilson. I have a letter from him by your
messenger full of sighs and groans: I don’t much heed them; for it is
his humour to deal in the dolefuls, and set himself off in the worst
light he can possibly devise: for instance, he tells me here, that his
temper, which was always execrable, is now worse than ever; and that he
is grown so touchy, that even the parson won’t trust himself to a hit at
backgammon with him. This is about as true as the account he gives of
his house-keeping, which I know is liberal to excess, but which he
represents as rascally in the extreme; pretending to say, that through
mere covetousness he has made a potatoe garden of his pleasure ground,
turned his coach-horses into the straw yard, and lowered the quality of
his Welch ale, till his servants are in mutiny, and his parishioners
consulting about hanging him in effigy.

Is all this true? De Lancaster asked.

Not any of it, Wilson replied. His poor neighbours are more disposed to
worship him in effigy, than to hang him. He may have planted his grounds
with potatoes, and turned his idle horses out to fodder, for I dare say
this hard winter has made havoc of his stores, as he tells me that he is
screwing up his farmers in revenge for their want of mercy to their
necessitous neighbours; but as for his covetousness, I give no credit to
that; on the contrary I happen to know that he has just now paid down
the purchase money of a company for a young officer in the line, in no
degree related to him, or indeed connected with him.

Is Jones the name of that young officer?

It is.

Gallant, glorious old man! How I reverence him for the action! How I
honour him for his benignity! I would go to do him service, or to give
him pleasure, though I were to walk thither on foot.

I perceive you know something of this Jones.

If you do perceive it, you will not need to be informed of it by me: and
now as I also perceive you are in the secret of my visit, I hope you
will consent to accompany me to-morrow, and then Cecilia’s mind will be
at rest.

To put her mind at rest, said Wilson, where would I not go? How
willingly then shall I accompany you upon a friendly errand to a worthy
man like Morgan!

Agreed! cried De Lancaster, and now I am in good humour with myself for
thinking and resolving on this visit.

Let me profit by your good humour then, rejoined the colonel with a
smile, and let me hear the remainder of your genealogy; for we have
turned our backs upon the Trojan war, and are drawing near to modern
history, when, according to your doctrine, truth becomes darkened, and
we get into the regions of deception; which I shall not be sorry for, as
I confess there is ever more amusement for me in a harmless pleasant
fiction, than in a dry uninteresting matter of fact.

What answer De Lancaster gave to this appeal will be found in the
following chapter.




CHAPTER VIII.

_The Narrative is resumed and concluded. A learned Lecture upon Harmony,
by which the unlearned hearer is not greatly edified._


Since you make so polite a tender of your patience, said De Lancaster,
to me, who have already put it to so hard a trial, I must resume my
narrative from the landing of Brute and his Trojans, when my ancestors
established themselves on this very spot, I do not say in this very
castle, under Camber, the second son of the aforesaid Brute.
Lud-Hurdibras was the grandson of Camber, and King Bladud was the son of
Hurdibras: he built, as is notorious to all the world, the city of
Bath, and was the projector of those salubrious baths, that _William of
Malmsbury_ would fain ascribe to Julius Cæsar, which I pronounce to be
an egregious anachronism, and you may take it _meo periculo_.

I take it at my own peril, said the colonel; for I have seen Bladud
himself with these very eyes standing centinel over the bath of his own
making, and I never met with any body hardy enough to dispute his title
to it.

Let it pass then! He was a benefactor to mankind by the institution of
those baths, and might have been more eminently so, had his opinion upon
the practicability of men’s flying in the air been established upon
experiment. I confess there is much plausibility in the project, but I
am also aware of some difficulties attending it, which merit
consideration. I do not say it may not be achieved, but I am not
prepared to recommend the undertaking to any friend, whose life is of
immediate consequence to his family.

It would be a famous lift, said the wooden-legged warrior, to people in
my mutilated predicament; and though I am not quite disposed to the
experiment myself, any body else, who is so inclined, will have my good
wishes.

That was exactly the language, cried De Lancaster, of King Bladud’s
courtiers, and the learned men of the time. They unanimously declared
that many notable discoveries might be struck out in astrology, which
was the reigning study of the day, if men would fly up high enough to
look after them; but they were not impatient to be amongst the first to
fly upon those discoveries. My ancestor however, who was then about the
person of the king, and an enthusiastic admirer of the sublime and
beautiful, went a step beyond them all, and actually contrived a very
ample and becoming pair of artificial wings, which in the judgment of
the very best mechanics then living promised all possible success to the
experiment. Upon their exhibition in presence of the sovereign and of a
committee specially appointed, so charmed was King Bladud with the skill
displayed in their construction, that he was graciously pleased to
authorize and empower the inventor himself to make trial of his own
pinions, with free leave to fly as far and as high as he saw fit, and to
perch at discretion wherever it might suit him, the chimney tops and
lattices of the chambers even of the maids of honour not excepted.

Happy man! cried Wilson; this was a roving commission of a most tempting
sort, and I hope your ancestor had too much gallantry to hesitate about
embracing it.

I beg your pardon, replied De Lancaster, my ancestor was not a man of
that forward character as to aspire to situations, that ought to be
above the ambition of a subject, but when this flattering offer was with
all becoming thankfulness most modestly declined, King Bladud himself
(as my ancestor no doubt foresaw) had the aforesaid wings fitted to his
royal shoulders; ascended the roof of the temple of Apollo (at that time
the loftiest edifice in the city of Troy-nouvant) and launching himself
into the air confidently, as became a prince so sagacious and
philosophical, committed his sacred person to the protection of Apollo
and the artificial supporters, which promised him so delicious an
excursion. Whether the fault was in the wings themselves, or in King
Bladud’s want of dexterity in the management of them, is not for me to
determine; but history puts it out of doubt that the attempt was fatal
to the adventurous monarch. He fell headlong on the steps of the temple,
(as you see in the picture fronting you) and was dashed in pieces in the
twentieth year of his reign, and the two hundred and twentieth from the
landing of Brute. All the world believed my ancestor a lost man, but
Lear, son of Bladud and heir to his kingdom, being a prince of a most
noble nature, and sensible to whom he was indebted for his so early
elevation to the throne, rewarded the artificer of his father’s pinions
by empowering him to affix them to his armorial bearing of the harp, and
from that hour to this the harp of the bard between the wings of Bladud
has been the proper and distinguishing shield of the De Lancasters, as
not only the records of the herald’s office, but the head of every spout
appertaining to the castle, can testify and evince.

The spouts alone would satisfy me, said the colonel, but the heralds and
the spouts together are authorities incontestible; but since you have
named Lear, I should wish to know if he is that very Lear, who,
according to the drama of our poet Shakespear, having parted his kingdom
between his two ungrateful daughters Gonerill and Regan, ran mad upon
the reflection of his own folly for having done it.

For his madness, replied De Lancaster, there is no authority. He
bestowed his eldest daughter Gonerill in marriage to Henuinus, Duke of
Cornwall, and Regan to Maglanus, Duke of Albania. His youngest daughter
Cordelia, who was justly his favourite, married Aganippus, prince of
Gallia, and succeeded to the crown at Lear’s death, being the first of
her sex, who had ever borne the title of queen absolute and governess of
Britain. After the decease of Aganippus she fell a victim to the malice
of her nephews Cunedagius and Morgan, sons of her unworthy sisters, and
being thrown into prison by them, died, after a reign of only five
years, by her own hand. The usurpers, who at first agreed to divide the
empire, soon rose in arms against each other, and Morgan was slain in
Cambria by Cunedagius, where the place of his death is yet called
Glen-Morgan, or Morgan’s Land, now in the possession of the friend, to
whom we meditate to-morrow’s visit.--But I am hastening to release you,
and conclude my narrative--The line of Brute, the Trojan, ended in the
year 3476 with Ferrex and Porrex, sons of old King Gorbodug, who swayed
the sceptre through a period of sixty and two years. During the whole
time of the Pentarchy, that took place upon the decease of the
abovenamed sons of Gorbodug, my family appear to have kept close in
their Cambrian retirement, till the reign of Mulmutius Dunwallo,
immediately subsequent to the Pentarchy. It was then that a learned
ancestor of mine assisted Mulmutius in compiling that incomparable code
of laws, which being turned into Latin from the British language by
Gildus Priscus, was in time long after translated into English by the
great King Alfred, and by him incorporated amongst his famous
statutes.--And now, my good friend, as I have always determined to have
nothing to do with modern history, I here wind up my long detail,
congratulating myself that those, from whom I trace my blood, had the
good sense to keep close in their quarters in Cambria upon the landing
of the Romans, never deigning to mix or intermarry either with them or
the Picts, who came with Roderic A. D. 73, or with the Saxons, who first
entered the land A. D. 390, or with the Danes in the time of Egbert,
much less with the Normans in a more recent period, but remained pure
and unadulterated from the days of Samothes, the grandson of Noah, to
the present moment, in which I have the honour of thanking you for the
attention, you have been pleased to bestow upon a detail, which I fear
has been extremely tedious and unentertaining to you throughout.

Assure yourself, my good sir, replied Wilson, that the attention I have
bestowed on your narrative has been amply repaid by the entertainment I
have received from it. You have given me a history of my native country,
which in many parts was perfectly new to me, and if it had had no
concern whatever with your genealogy, still it would have been
interesting to me, who have never thought, nor had the curiosity to
enquire, about the annals of a time so very distant. That you have
authorities for what you have narrated I cannot doubt, for I am sure you
are incapable of a voluntary fiction, which, if any such there is, must
rest with others, not with you. As for the gratification you may derive
from the persuasion, that you can trace your descent from the son of
Noah, and by consequence, through Noah, even from Adam himself, grace
forbid I should attempt to lessen it, persuaded as I am, that you have
too much consideration for Moses to enlist with the Pre-Adamites. At the
same time I am free to own, that my respect for you, being founded on
the virtues of your character, receives little addition from the
circumstances of your pedigree; let me not however be considered as an
abettor of plebean sentiments; I acknowledge a degree of prejudice for a
well-born gentleman, and so long as you display the wings of King Bladud
only on the shoulders of King Bardus’s harp, I look with respect upon
your ancient banners; and henceforward when blind David Williams shall
make your castle hall resound with his melodious harp, I shall recollect
with pleasure that you have not only a natural delight, but also an
hereditary interest, in that noble instrument. I am myself a lover of
music; but it is a love without knowledge, for I neither know the
practice, nor ever studied the theory of it. I like this tune, and I
can’t tell why; I don’t like that, and can assign no reason for it. If
music only creates surprise in me by the wonderful execution of a
performer, I scarcely wish to hear it above once; if it moves my
passions, and elicits (as it sometimes will) my tears, I could listen to
it, as I may say, for ever; no repetition can exhaust the charm. What
this is I cannot define, and for that very reason I suppose it to be
nature; for art admits of explanation, but there is no logic, that
applies to instinct.

This was an unlucky remark, and the colonel stepped a little out of his
natural character when he risqued it: had he kept clear of definitions,
and said nothing about instinct, he might have escaped a lecture on the
Harmonics, which now became unavoidable, and he heard himself addressed
as follows--

You discern correctly, my good colonel, as to effect, not so as to
cause. You say there is no logic, that applies to instinct; I say there
is no instinct, that applies to rationality: the brute creation is
submitted to it, and directed by it; man must not offer to degrade his
virtues, or defend his vices, by a reference to instinct: the plea of
impulse will not save the criminal; for there are no propensities, which
reason may not conquer. From what you tell me I perceive that you
understand as much of music as ninety-nine in a hundred, who affect to
profess it, and more than many, who profess to teach it, forasmuch as
you feel it: now as there can be no effect without a cause, depend upon
it, there is a reason why you feel exactly in the manner you describe,
and in no other, though to investigate that reason, and intelligibly
describe it to you, cannot be done without a more intimate knowledge of
the constituent properties and powers of music, than falls to many
people’s lot to attain. To descant upon these at present would take up
more time than either of us would perhaps find convenient to devote to
it. I will postpone it to a better opportunity, when I flatter myself I
shall be able to relate to you so many striking instances of the
astonishing powers of harmony, as will set that sacred science in a
stronger and a clearer light, than you may be as yet aware of. Believe
me, it is one of the sublimest studies, that the human faculties can
embrace. The systems, that have come down to us from the Greek and Roman
harmonists, as well as all that has been written by the moderns on that
subject, are above measure difficult, elaborate and recondite--

Then I shall never understand them, said the colonel, nor desire to have
any thing to do with them.

Pardon me! resumed De Lancaster: If leisure now served, I could give you
specimens of the pains I have taken in the way of illustration, not only
with the learned treatise of _Vincentio Galilei_, a noble Spaniard,
published in the year 1581, but also with the Satyricon of _Martianus
Capella_, as edited and illustrated by the celebrated Grotius in his
early years. Permit me to say that I could give you the scale, and mark
out to you the distinct semitones of _Quarlino_, _Giovanni Bardi_, and
_Pierro Strozzi_. This would be demonstration, that could not fail to
edify, and at the same time I would adduce such evidence, as should
prove to you that my ancestorial harp was the very prototype of that,
which _Epigonus_ of _Ambracia_ was said to have played upon with forty
strings, when he first taught the Sicyonian minstrels to lay aside the
plectrum, and employ their fingers in the place of it: when _Julius
Pollux_ therefore gives this new-constructed harp the name of Epigonium
in honour of Epigonus, it is a mere trick, after the custom of the
Greeks, to arrogate all originality to their countrymen, and defraud my
ancestor of his prior title to give name to his own invention. In like
manner I can detect their plagiarism, when they ascribe the invention of
the double-headed plectrum to Sappho, whilst I have models still in my
possession, that prove it to have been the very identical plectrum in
general use, when my ingenious ancestor struck out a better practice. I
am therefore very naturally interested to prevent my ancestorial harp
from being confounded with the seven-stringed lyre, ascribed by Homer to
Mercury, of which the testudo formed the sounding-board; much less would
I have it mistaken for that delineated by _Hyginus_ with crooked arms,
and least of all with the suspicious model in the museum of the Medici.

All this, my dear sir, said the colonel, I should be extremely delighted
with, were I capable of understanding it; but alas! how should I, who
was never accustomed to admire any thing above the crash of a regimental
band, comprehend a single word of what you have been saying to me? That
I am capable of preferring one tune before another is all I pretend to,
but to assign any reason for that preference is what I do not pretend
to.

Yet there is a reason, resumed De Lancaster, and that reason is not
inscrutable to all, because not enquired into by you. That _tones_ have
power over the human feelings will not be disputed; but tones have
different properties, and of course different operations: the one,
entire, full and legitimate _tone_ contains within itself a variety of
divisional parts, by the expression and application of which various
passions may be excited, and various effects produced. The full tone
may be resolved into the half-tone, or _hemitonium_; the half-tone into
the quarter-tone, or _diesis_; neither does its divisibility stop here,
for the diesis may be again resolved, first, into its proper
quarter-tone, or _tetartemoria_, which be pleased to observe, is also
called _enarmonios_; secondly, into its third of a tone, or
_tritemoria_, (which by the way is the true chromatique) and thirdly and
lastly, into a tone, which involves a third part of a full tone and half
a third, and this is called _hemiolia_--And now, my good friend, having
given you some insight into the various combinations and resolutions of
musical tones, according to the system of the Greek writers on the
harmonics, (which, though briefly stated, cannot fail to be perfectly
clear to your comprehension) I think I may trust you to discover the
reason, why certain modulations and assortments of tones are pleasing to
you, and others not. These are the elements of all harmony, and as you
are now fully possessed of the definition of them, you cannot possibly
find any difficulty in the application.

I am under no difficulty at all, cried the colonel, in finding out when
I am pleased, and that being the only discovery I have any concern in, I
will trouble you no further to explain to me why I am pleased, but take
your word for having given me the true reason, and be content.

Here the lecture ended as many lectures do: the expounder was perfectly
satisfied with the instruction he had imparted, and the disciple was
entirely reconciled to remain in ignorance of what he did not wish to
understand.

At this moment Cecilia opportunely entered the room, and the
recollection of Sir Owen’s proposal instantly occuring to her father, he
desired to have a little private talk with her, and Wilson on the hint
withdrew.




CHAPTER IX.

_The last in the Book. The Author presents Cecilia De Lancaster to his
Readers, and trusts that he exhibits no unnatural, or ideal, Character._


Cecilia De Lancaster, of whom I am about to speak, was now in her
twenty-ninth year, and three years younger than her brother Philip,
father of our hero John. I have already said, that, since her father
had been a widower, she had persisted in devoting her attention to him,
and to the superintendance of his household.

Convinced that she possessed his entire affection, and sensible that his
happiness in a great degree depended upon her, she had hitherto
withstood every overture for changing her condition. The harmony,
typified in her name, was realized in her nature: it was manifested and
expressed in every movement, every feature of her mind, her temper and
her person. Time, that had robbed her of the freshness of her bloom, had
repaid her by maturing and improving charms more permanent, endowments
more attractive. There was a smile, so characteristically her own, that
it was hard to conceive it could ever be bestowed without being felt,
and, such was her discernment, that perhaps it was very rarely bestowed
where it was not deserved. Her eyes were the genuine interpreters of her
heart: when turned upon the poor or afflicted, they melted into
compassion; when directed towards her friends, they glistened with
affection; when uplifted towards her God, their expression might be
called divine. Her voice came upon the ear like music--There is a
passage in a letter written by our hero to one of his friends, that
describes it in the following terms. “It is,” says he, “of so sweet a
pitch, that, whensoever it is heard, I am struck with wonder how it
comes to pass, that others do not tune their voices to it: for my own
part I may say, that my first efforts of articulation were instinctively
in unison with her tones; and therefore it is, that I have never
entered into argument with loud and boisterous speakers, or elevated my
voice to the annoyance of any man’s ears, since I have been admitted
into society.”

Such was Cecilia De Lancaster, who now in that sweet voice, which we
have been describing--(Oh that ye would imitate it, ye tuneless
talkers!) requested her father to impart to her his commands, not
unaware that they most probably referred to his interview with her
importunate admirer Sir Owen ap Owen, baronet, of Penruth Abbey.

This conjecture was soon confirmed by the recital, which her father now
gave of the baronet’s proposals; he stated them as advantageously for
the proponent, as the case would admit of: his family and fortune were
unexceptionable; he saw no objection to him on the score of temper; he
had the character of being a kind master, an easy landlord and a
hospitable neighbour: it must be owned that the good man was not
overstocked with wit or learning, but he had no conceit or
self-sufficiency to betray him into attempts, that might subject him to
ridicule: his pursuits were not above the level of his understanding, so
that upon the whole he thought his friend Sir Owen might pass muster
with the generality of country gentlemen.

I think of him, said Cecilia, exactly as you do; his pursuits are suited
to his understanding, and his manners are suited to his pursuits: these
are easily counted up, for they consist in little else but his hounds
and his bottle: I can partake of neither; my happiness centers in the
consciousness of possessing the good opinion and affection of my
beloved father: That blessing I enjoy at home; I need not run to Penruth
Abbey in pursuit of it; ’tis here, and ever present whilst I am with
you. As for Sir Owen’s addresses, he has repeated them so often for the
last five years, and has so constantly received the same answer, that I
must suppose he now compliments me with his proposal rather from habit,
than with any serious idea, that it can avail. As a neighbour I shall be
glad to see Sir Owen, even at the tea-table, provided he is sober, but
as a lover I hope to see no more of him, and I flatter myself I shall
not; especially should a certain lady arrive, whom I understand he is
expecting at the Abbey.

Upon De Lancaster’s asking who that lady was, Cecilia informed him that
she was the widow of his brother David, the Spanish merchant, lately
deceased. This lady she understood to be a native of Spain, and that she
was bringing with her from Cadiz a boy, the nephew of Sir Owen, and of
course presumptive heir to his estate and title. Judge then, added she,
if some address will not be employed by Mrs. Owen to keep her son in the
succession, and if my poor lover has nothing but his Welch wits to
oppose to her Spanish finesse, it is easy to conjecture what turn the
politics of Penruth Abbey are likely to take.

Well, cried the father, it was my part to make good my promise to Sir
Owen; it is your’s to decide upon his fate. This you have done, and I
may now say without scruple, you have wisely done; yet recollect my dear
Cecilia, we have as yet but this one infant in our stock, and I do not
expect that Mrs. De Lancaster will prove a very prolific mother.

I trust, replied Cecilia, that this fine boy will live, and then I shall
think Mrs. De Lancaster a very fortunate mother, though she may never
greet us with a second hope.

Heaven grant the child may live! exclaimed De Lancaster; devoutly I
implore it. But oh! my dear Cecilia, where is our stream of ancestry
alive but in yourself? In whose veins but in your’s does the ancient
current of our blood run pure? Look at your brother! _Look at the rock,
from which this child is hewn!_ Is there in that dead mass one spark of
native fire, one quickening ray of genius?--No; not one. Stampt with an
inauspicious name, he is of all the foregone Philips _Philippissimus_.
Look at the hapless mother of the babe! Has she a heart? I know she has
not that, which answers to the name: she had, but it is gone. Alas for
thee, poor babe! being so fathered and so mothered, child, from whom
can’st thou derive or heart or head--?

From you, his grandfather, replied Cecilia: Come, come, my dearest sir,
I’ll not allow of this despondency. Rise from your chair, and come with
me and visit this new scyon of your stock! Look in his lovely face;
contemplate the bright promise of a true De Lancaster, a virtuous hero,
born to crown your name with honour: See him! you’ll own how Providence
has blessed you, and blush for having doubted.

The father rose, took the hand of his daughter, and, whilst the tears
were brimming in his eyes, followed where she led.

Now, my friendly reader, if you have gone patiently along with me
through the pages of this my first book, let me hope that you will
proceed not unpleasantly to the conclusion of the next.

You know that every story must have time to expand itself: characters
must not be hurried into action before they are understood; and a novel,
though it ought to be dramatic, is not absolutely a drama.

My hero is yet in the cradle, and I must keep his grandfather and others
in the foreground, till he is fit to be presented to you: when that time
comes, old age may cease to prattle, philology may fall back and NATURE
step forward to conduct and close the scene.

In the mean time if I take the freedom of saying a few words, whilst the
fable pauses, recollect that I cannot in the course of nature have many
more opportunities of conversing with you, and few have been the
writers, with whom you have had more frequent intercourse, or who have
been more pertinaciously industrious to deserve your favour and esteem,
for I am now striving to amuse and edify even the youngest of my
readers, when I myself am short of fourscore years by less than four;
and I am inclined to believe, that the mere manual operation of writing
these pages, (as I am now doing for the third time with my own hand)
would be found task enough for any person of my age, without engaging in
the labour of inventing, or the risque of fathering them.

Be that as it may, the work is done, and done, not in the evil spirit of
the time, but without a single glance at any living character; conscious
therefore that I have not endangered what is sacred to me as a
gentleman, the critics are most cordially welcome to every thing they
can find about me as an author. However as I know some of them to be
fair and honourable gentlemen, I hope they will recollect how often I
have been useful to them in the sale of their publications, and assist
me now with their good word in the circulation of De Lancaster.


                        END OF THE FIRST BOOK.




                           BOOK THE SECOND.




CHAPTER I.

_A Country Visit according to the old Costuma._


By peep of day every thing, that had life, in and about Kray Castle,
horses, dogs and cats included, were up and in motion, save only the
lady in the straw, who could not rise, and the gentleman in bed, who did
not chuse to leave it, namely Philip the fisher, who had not got one
perch, and probably not so many _bites_ from beside the banks, as he had
been favoured with from between the blankets.

The two companions, who had pledged themselves to this adventure,
rendezvoused at the same moment, though not exactly under the same
colours; for whilst the scarlet of De Lancaster’s apparel was fiery
bright, the uniform of Wilson had a cast of the campagne in it, having
seen some service, and endured some smoke.

Amongst the numerous personages, who attended these adventurers to the
door of the vehicle, in which they embarked their bodies, our new-born
hero took a conspicuous post, probably more in compliment to the
curiosity of his nurse, than selfishly to gratify his own. Nevertheless
it is recorded, that when the machine, (called in those days a coach)
was put in motion by the joint energy of six fat coach-horses and one
fat driver, little John clapped his hands, and crowed amain for joy: if
he made any speech upon the occasion, there was one more instance of
miraculous prematurity lost to the world, for nobody remembered it.

Though the country they had to travel over was not quite so flat as
Norfolk, nor the road altogether like a gravel walk, yet the journey was
prosperous, for the team was strong, and a persevering amble, now and
then exasperated into an actual trot, brought the travellers within
sight of the mansion, embowered in yew-trees, where dwelt the descendant
of King Lear, father of a daughter less ambitious than Regan, but far
more dutiful.

A forerunner, who without trial of his speed, had outstripped the coach
by some miles, had announced the coming of the lord of Kray Castle, and
the fires in the old conventual kitchen sparkled at the news: the
drunken old warder had got on his fur gown, and the bard of the family
was ready in the gallery of the great hall to give the customary
salutation to so honourable a guest. When Mr. De Lancaster had passed
the abbey-like porch, and found himself in the aforesaid hall, he turned
round, and made a courteous inclination of his head to the harper, who,
like Timotheus, was _placed on high_: noticing the domestics and
retainers, who lined his passage to the receiving room, he said in a
whisper to his friend the colonel--These honest folks don’t look as if
they had suffered by a reduction either of the quantity or quality of
their Welch ale.--When ushered into the room, where the master of the
mansion was, they found him sitting in his gouty chair, with his foot
wrapped in flannel on a stool, in company with a great collection of
Morgans, who hung quietly by the wall: upon sight of De Lancaster his
countenance was lighted up with joy. This is kind indeed, he exclaimed;
this is an honour I could not expect, and a favour I shall never forget,
taking the hand of De Lancaster, and making an effort, as if to press it
to his lips. Turning to Colonel Wilson, he cried--Ah my old friend, I am
happy to see you. Welcome to Glen-Morgan! Why you look bravely, and are
nimbler upon one leg, than I am upon two: you see how I am suffering for
the sins of my youth.--He then called out amain for Mrs. Richards his
housekeeper; he might have spared himself the trouble, for Mrs. Richards
was in the room, and made herself responsible for well-aired beds,
reminding her master, who questioned her very closely, that Captain
Jones had lodged ten nights in the room, which she had prepared for Mr.
De Lancaster, and he had left Glen-Morgan that very morning: the same
good care had been taken of Colonel Wilson’s apartment. Satisfaction
being given upon these points, Mrs. Richards was strictly enjoined to
see that not an individual belonging to his worthy guest wanted for any
thing in his house, nay, if a dog had followed his coach, let it be her
duty to take care that he was welcomed and well fed.--These were the
manners, and such the primitive hospitality of those days.

When dinner was announced, and old Morgan, wheeled in his chair into the
eating-room, the parson in his canonicals at the foot of the table gave
his benediction to an abundant mass of steaming viands, which bespoke a
liberal rather than an elegant provider. A grave and elderly gentleman,
who had the health of the family under his care, pronounced a loud Amen
at the conclusion of the parson’s prayer, and the butler at the
sideboard bowed his head. The family lawyer was also present, having a
dinner retainer ad libitum, and a painter of no small eminence, who was
upon his tour for the purpose of taking sketches of back-grounds for his
portraits, completed the party.

Every guest at table had an attendant at his back in full livery of
green and red with boot-cuffs, on which the tailor of the household had
wantonly bestowed such a bountiful profusion of scarlet plush, that the
hand, which gave a plate, seldom failed to sweep away the bread beside
it, or the knife and fork, as it might happen: some discomposure also
occurred to the wearers of wigs, when a dish was put on or taken off
from the table. The harp would not have been silent, but that Mr. De
Lancaster observed, that the din of the table would probably be louder
than the melody of the serenade, and with much good reason suggested,
that it might be more respectful to the musician, not to call upon him
for his attendance till there was a better chance for hearing his
performance.

When the table at length was cleared, and the health of the new-born
heir had gone round, De Lancaster did not fail to call for the minstrel,
and Mr. Gryffin Gryffin made his entrance with his harp, habited in his
garb of office with his badge of merit pendant on his breast. After a
prelude, calculated to display his powers of execution, he paused to
know if it was the pleasure of the company to honour him with their
choice of any favourite melody; to this De Lancaster with his usual
courtesy made answer, that for himself he should much prefer to hear
some strain of Mr. Gryffin’s own composition, accompanied by the voice.
Gryffin bowed, and confessed that he had been employed upon a simple
melody of a pensive and pathetic cast, adapted to a few valedictory
stanzas, which Captain Jones, who had that morning departed from
Glen-Morgan to embark for the West Indies, had left upon his table,
purposely, as it should seem, to fall into his hands.--

By all means give us those! was the exclamation of more than one person
in the company.

The obedient minstrel again made a graceful reverence, and throwing his
hands upon his harp, sung as follows--

    “Hark, hark, tis the bugle! It wafts to my ear
    “The signal for parting--Adieu to my dear.
    “I go to the isles, where the climate is death,
    “And Fate’s pallid hand weaves my funeral wreath.

    “When I leave my soul’s treasure forlorn on the shore,
    “And I strain my sad eyes, till they see her no more,
    “My sorrows unheeded no pity shall move,
    “While my cold-hearted comrades cry--Why did you love?

    “A soldier, whose sword is his all, should obey
    “No mistress but Honor--and truly they say--
    “Behold! at her call, to my duty I fly;
    “Can a soldier do more for his honor than die?”

When Mr. Gryffin Gryffin had concluded his madrigal, of which the melody
at least was extremely well composed, the painter, who ought to have
been a better critic, than to have overlooked the effect, which it had
had upon the countenance of old Morgan, unadvisedly enquired who the
mistress of the poet was--A poet’s mistress, you may be sure, De
Lancaster instantly replied; every thing is imaginary; the mistress and
the muse are alike ideal beings, and death and dying are only put in to
make out the rhymes; then turning to the master of the table, he
said--Brother Morgan, I perceive you drink no wine; I have had my glass,
and if the company will excuse us, you and I old fellows will leave them
to their claret, and take a cup of coffee tete à tete in the next room.

The motion was seasonable, and so immediately seconded by the man of
medicine, that the mover and the man to be moved soon found themselves
in a situation equally well adapted to the compassionate object of the
one, and the seasonable relief of the other.

Here as soon as they had taken their seats, and were left to
themselves, De Lancaster commenced his lecture _De consolatione_. On
this occasion it so happened, that a fair opportunity was not made use
of, for, except a slight hint at Cicero and his daughter, very little
philology or common-place argument were resorted to: common sense was
found upon trial to answer all purposes quite as well: when the one
lamented that he had not discovered his daughter’s attachment, the other
very naturally demanded, who but the lady was to be blamed for that?
Where there was such a flagrant want of confidence on the part of the
daughter, and no compulsion on that of the father, by what kind of
sophistry could he suggest occasion for any self-reproach?--To this when
Morgan answered, that he feared his daughter had been awed into
concealment, De Lancaster sharply replied, that he defied him to assign
any honourable motive for a disingenuous action: a father could only
recommend the situation, which he thought most eligible and advantageous
for his child, presuming that she had not previously engaged her heart;
in which if he was deceived by her, it only proved that either he was
very unsuspecting, or she extremely cunning. In conclusion Morgan was
driven to confess that his only remaining compunction arose from the
reflection upon what Mr. Philip De Lancaster might suffer by a
connection, so little likely to promote his happiness.

If that be your regret, resumed De Lancaster, dismiss it from your mind
at once. Philip is made at all points for your daughter: no couple can
be better paired. Fondness on either side would destroy their mutual
tranquillity. They have given us, under Providence, a grandson, and if
that blessing be continued to us, you and I must agree to regard the
intermediate generation as a blank, and rest our only hope on what that
child may be.

Heaven grant him life, cried Morgan! You have cured me of the mournfuls.
Let us join our friends.




CHAPTER II.

_Robert De Lancaster returns to Kray-Castle. Another Visit is in
Meditation._


As the porter, who lays down his burden and his knot, has probably a
quicker sense, and greater relish for the pleasure, which that
relaxation gives, than the gentleman, who never carried any thing
heavier than the coat upon his back, so did it fare with the good old
lord paramount of the manor of Glen-Morgan. He was just now the lightest
man in the company, forasmuch as he had got rid of a heavy wallet of
vexations, and in the gaiety of his heart, he declared, that as for any
pain the gout could give (which in fact at that very moment gave no pain
at all) he regarded it as nothing: a man was not to flinch and make wry
faces at a little twinge of the toe, when he had a gallant officer in
his eye, who had undergone the amputation of a leg.

Yes, said the colonel, I have lost one leg; I should not like to lose
another; but in our way of life we must take things as they turn out;
considering how often I have heard the bullets whistle, I think myself
well off.

I perceive, cried the painter, it is your right leg, colonel, which you
have lost: the misfortune I should think would have been greater, had
you been deprived of your right arm.

So the world would think, sir, replied the colonel, had it been your
case; but we poor soldiers sometimes want our legs to save our lives.

Your wounds sometimes, said De Lancaster, will save your lives: the
scars, that Caius Marius bore about him, rendered his visage so
terrible, that the assassinating soldier did not dare to strike him.--I
have painted him in that very crisis, replied the artist; but I confess
I have trusted to his natural expression, and left out the scars.--You
have done right as a painter, rejoined De Lancaster; an historian is
tied down to facts.

After an evening, passed in conversation, cheerful at least, though
little worth recording, and a night consumed in sleep, of which no
record can be taken, Robert De Lancaster rose with the sun, and, after
about five hours travel, was set down in safety with his friend the
colonel at his castle door, where Cecilia met him with a smiling
welcome, and a happy report, that all was well. This report was in a few
minutes after confirmed by Mr. Llewellyn, who had the health of the lady
above stairs under his care. Mr. Philip also presented himself, and our
hero John, (though last and least) exhibited his person, and seemed
perfectly well satisfied with the reception, that was given him.

Llewellyn was a man of information, and had a spirit of enquiry, by
which he became to the full as deep in the secrets of the families he
visited, as in those of the medicines he administered. To Sir Owen at
all times, sick or well, he had free access, and he paid him more than
professional attendance: he now brought the news of Mrs. David Owen’s
arrival at Penruth Abbey. He had seen her, and being as usual in a
communicative vein, he proceeded to launch out into many of those
trivial particulars, which are of easy carriage, and with which
gentlemen of his vocation are apt to enrich their conversation to the
great edification and amusement of their employers.

Mr. Llewellyn would not positively pronounce Mrs. David Owen to be a
beauty, yet he was aware that many people would call her pretty; she was
not however to his taste: there was a want of sensibility and a certain
delicacy of expression, which in his conception of the female character
(and here he addressed himself to Cecilia) was the very _crisis_ of all
that is charming in woman.

You mean _criterion_, my friend, said De Lancaster, but you are _in the
shop_, and there errors are excepted; so go on; proceed with your
description.

Mr. Llewellyn was too well accustomed to these little rubs to be daunted
by them, and finding that he had gained attention, proceeded to describe
Mrs. Owen as a sprightly little woman of a very dark complexion, with an
aquiline nose, quick sparkling eyes and thick arched eyebrows, black as
the raven’s plume: Mr. Llewellyn professed himself no admirer of black
hair; (Cecilia’s was light brown). Her dress, he said, was after the
fashion of the Spanish ladies, as he had seen them represented on the
London stage, when _he walked the hospitals_.--Here Mr. Llewellyn made
another slip, but it was out of De Lancaster’s reach, who had no data
for a comment.--He acknowledged that her style of dress was well
calculated to set off her shape, and display the elegance of her taper
limbs to the best advantage: he would have the company be prepared to
encounter the sight of bare elbows and short petticoats; for his own
part he was no friend to either. She had taken up her guitar at Sir
Owen’s desire, and sung two or three of her Spanish airs, accompanied by
certain twanging strokes on that instrument, which, though it resembled
nothing that could be called playing, had however no unpleasing effect.
She sung in a high shrill tone, and accompanied the words, which he did
not understand, with certain looks and gestures, which he did not wish
to describe.

Their melodies are Moorish, said De Lancaster; they use a great deal of
action when they sing: the Greeks themselves did the same. Does Mrs.
David Owen speak English?

With great fluency, but with a foreign accent. She had her son with her,
about four or five years old, the very picture of herself; extremely
forward, cunning and intelligent beyond what could be expected from a
child of his age. Sir Owen had been rather disconcerted and thrown out
of his bias by his visitors on their first arrival; but he had now
acquiesced, and the lady seemed to have the game in hand. Mr. Llewellyn
concluded by declaring, that if he had not been told she was a Spaniard,
he should verily have suspected her to be a Jewess.

Whether she be Jewess or Christian, said the master of the family, we
must pay her the compliment of a first visit, and without delay.

The next morning, as soon as the sun appeared upon the eastern hills,
and gave the promise of a fair day, order of march was given out for the
afternoon; dinner was announced for an early hour, and again the
body-coach set out with De Lancaster and Cecilia occupying the seat of
honour, and Philip with his back to the great front glass, followed by
two reverend personages grey-headed, and in no respect resembling light
horsemen, save only that they carried arms before them, though not in
holsters of the newest military fashion. The elegant simplicity of
Cecilia’s dress very happily contrasted the splendid drapery of the old
gentleman, who had relieved the scarlet coat, not in the happiest
manner, with a waistcoat of purple satin, richly embroidered with gold,
and not much exceeded by the coat in the length of its flaps, or the
capaciousness of its pockets. Philip was by no means over-studious of
the toilette. Colonel Wilson had gone home to receive his son Edward,
who was now elected off from Westminster school to Trinity College in
Cambridge.




CHAPTER III.

_The Visit to Penruth Abbey. Certain Personages, who will fill
conspicuous Parts in this eventful History, are introduced to our
Readers._


As the cumbrous machine, to which the family of the De Lancasters had
now committed their persons, disdained the novelty of springs, it was
well for the company within that it was provided with a soft lining of
blue velvet and enormous cushions, stuft with swan’s down. It had been
the admiration of the county, when its owner served the office of
sheriff about twenty years past, and though its original splendour was
somewhat faded, it still exhibited on its pannels a vast shield
emblazoned with the device of the harp between a copious expanse of
wings. When it turned the point of the avenue leading to Penruth Abbey,
looming large as an Indiaman in a fog off Beachy Head, it was readily
descried by the porter from his lodge, who, huddling on his tufted gown
of ceremony, rung out the signal on the turret-bell; whereupon all the
waitingmen, drunk or sober, ranged themselves in the hall, and old Robin
ap Rees prepared himself to salute the respected visitor with a
flourish on the harp, as he entered the house.

Robert De Lancaster, followed by his son and daughter, passed through
the domestic files to the tune of Shenkin, and was received at the door
of the saloon by Sir Owen, who presented his sister-in-law in due form,
making her reverences in the style and fashion of Spain, where the
ladies bow, and the men curtsey.

The good old man acquitted himself with all the gallantry of the good
old court, and took his seat with due respect and ceremony beside the
lady. When he had adjusted the tyes of his perriwig and the flaps of his
coat, having drawn off his high-topped gloves to give a due display to
his ruffles, Mrs. Rachel Owen began the conversation by telling him how
much she admired his equipage, which she complimented by saying it was
exactly upon the model of the coaches of the Spanish nobles: the English
carriages, she observed, were generally very ill constructed and in a
bad taste, particularly those she travelled in, drawn by only two
beggarly horses, unmercifully whipped by a brat of a postillion; whereas
in her country no man of distinction could pass from place to place
without his six mules, guided by the voice, unincumbered by either reins
or harness, and ornamented with bells, which in her opinion gave a
cheerful sound, and had a very dignified effect.

Why yes, madam, said De Lancaster, every country is attached to its own
customs. The Spaniard prefers his mule, the Laplander his rein-deer, the
inhabitant of the desart his camel, and some tribes bordering upon
Abyssinia ride their cows. The animals no doubt are adapted to their
several climates: in England we are contented with horses, and as our
vehicles are apt to have a great deal of iron-work about them, we are
satisfied with the jingling they make, and readily dispense with the
amusement of bells.

He then proceeded to pass some high encomiums on the beauty and majesty
of the Castilian language, which he said he could read and understand,
when spoken, though he was not able to keep up a conversation in it. He
remarked upon the excellence of their proverbs, which he said was a
proof both of the fecundity and antiquity of a language. She
acknowledged the justness of his remark, and instanced the romance of
Cervantes as abounding in proverbs. She believed they were frequent in
the Hebrew language, and asked him if they were also common in the
Greek.

Very much so, madam, replied De Lancaster, in the writings of the
Greeks. As to the Hebrews, the wise sayings of Solomon alone furnish a
very copious collection, and are by us specifically called his
_Proverbs_, or as the Greeks would term them his _Paræmiæ_, which some
express by the word proverb, following Cicero’s interpretation; others
by the word adage, preferring the authority of Varro, the most learned
of all the Roman philologists.

The lady, who had drawn this conversation upon herself by an affectation
of talking about what she did not understand, now perceiving the eyes of
the company directed towards her, and a general silence kept whilst De
Lancaster was speaking, felt her vanity so much flattered by having
this learned harangue addressed to her, that, in order to hold it on,
she ventured to ask which of the Greek authors were most famous for
their proverbs.

Madam, replied De Lancaster, your question, though extremely pertinent
for you to ask, is not easy for me to answer with the precision I could
wish. I can only tell you that the Greek oracles were in general adages,
and many of the latter are to be traced even in Homer: the bulk of them
however is to be collected from Aristotle the Peripatetic, and his
disciples Theophrastus and Clearchus of Irlöe, from Chrysippus,
Cleanthes, Theætetus, Aristides, Aristophanes, Æschylus, Mylo,
Aristarchus, and many others, that do not just now occur to me to name
to you.

These are great authorities indeed, cried Mrs. Owen, more and more
delighted with the conversation as it grew more and more unintelligible
to her; and pray, learned sir, added she, condescend to inform me where
the wise sayings of these great men are to be met with.

De Lancaster was not a man to withhold his answer from any question upon
a point of philology, could any such have been put to him by his
cook-maid; whereas Mrs. Owen had fairly hooked him in to believe that
she was interested in his discourse, and solicitous to be informed.
Possessed with this opinion, he replied--Madam, every question that you
put to me is a convincing proof, that the ladies in your country turn
their minds to studies, in which our English women have no ambition to
be instructed (a conclusion falser than which he never made in his
life) and it is with particular satisfaction I have the honour to inform
you, that in Zenobius the sophist, or (as some will have it) Zenodotus,
in Diogenianus of Heraclea, and in the Collectanea of Suidas, you will
find ample store to gratify your very laudable curiosity: I would
recommend to you also to consult Athenæus, Stobæus, Laertius, Michael
Apostolius the sophist, Theophrastus called Logotheta, and others, that
might be pointed out; but for the present perhaps these may suffice.

I dare say they will, cried Sir Owen, and if you find them in this
house, sister Rachel, I’ll give you leave to keep them. Lord bless you,
my good neighbour, she never heard the name of one of them, nor is there
a monk in all Spain, that ever did put a word of theirs under his cowl,
or ever will. I tell you they are as dull as asses, and as obstinate as
mules. Rachel knows no more of what you have been saying to her than I
do.

This side speech of the baronet’s, so unseasonably true, had scarce
passed his lips, when little David bolted into the room, and having
fixed his piercing eyes upon the person of De Lancaster, ran up to his
mother, and in a screaming voice cried out--Look, look, mamma, there’s a
man in a black wig, for all the world like our old governor of
Cadiz!--Hush, hush, saucy child, cried the mother, stopping his mouth
with her hand.--Don’t stop him, I pray you, said the good man; when
children find out likenesses, ’tis a proof that they make observations.
Your son compares me to the governor of Cadiz, and I dare say I am
honoured by the comparison.

That is true politeness, said Mrs. Owen, addressing herself respectfully
to De Lancaster. It is not often that great learning and great urbanity
are found in the same person: when they are, how infinitely they adorn
each other!--a reflection this, so much to the honour of Mrs. David
Owen, that lest I may not have many to record equally to her credit, I
am the more inclined to notice it upon this opportunity.

Addressing herself to Mr. Philip De Lancaster, she said--I take for
granted, sir, you are extremely fond of the beautiful infant, of which I
am to give you joy--Philip bowed and made no answer.--I hear, repeated
she, he is an uncommon fine boy--Philip was of opinion that all infants
were alike: for his part he could mark no difference between
them--Perhaps you have not studied them with quite so much attention as
you have given to your books--Philip was not very fond of reading--Of
country sports perhaps--Still less--Of planting, farming, building?--Not
in the least of either--Mrs. Owen seemed resolved to find his ruling
passion--Did he take pleasure in the wholesome exercise of walking?--He
doubted if it was wholesome, and he never walked, if he could avoid it:
he angled now and then, and had no dislike to a game of chess--I
comprehend you now, said the inquisitive lady; fishing is an amusement,
that accords with meditation, and chess demands reflection and a fixt
attention--I give little or no attention to it, replied Philip; and that
may be the reason, why I never win a game--That certainly may be the
reason, resumed the lady, and I’m persuaded you have struck upon it.

The conversation now took a general turn. Tea was served, and the black
prying eyes of Rachel Owen were at leisure to scrutinize the dress and
person of Cecilia, whom the baronet seemed now disposed to release from
all further solicitation. Master David Owen in the mean time amused
himself with teazing a poor little Spanish lap-dog, which, but for him,
would have quietly reposed its diminutive body in his mother’s muff.
When reprimanded by Sir Owen for tormenting a dumb creature, he set his
nails with a most inveterate resolution into the little creature’s tail,
and to his infinite delight convinced the hearers, that he had no dumb
creature between his fingers. This produced a slight box on the ear
from his uncle, and the yell of the suffering dog was instantly
overpowered by the louder yell of the enraged tormentor--Poor fellow,
said Mrs. Owen, you shall play with little Don when your uncle is not
present: boys must be amused; must they not Mr. De Lancaster?--Not with
cruelty I should hope, he replied; they ought not to be indulged in that
amusement; and it is a very bad prognostic, when they can be amused by
it--The dog is of little value to me, said Mrs. Owen, and I would sooner
wring his nasty neck off with my own hands, than he should annoy my
brother Owen, and expose my darling boy to be punished by him.

The dog, madam, said the old gentleman with a gravity, that was highly
tinctured with displeasure, the dog may be of little value, but humanity
is of the highest; and a more sacred lesson cannot be impressed upon
the mind of your son, whilst it is yet capable of receiving the
impression. Permit me also to observe to you that no lady wrings off the
neck of a dog with her own hands: we should view it as an act of
violence so totally out of character, that I must doubt if she ever
could recover it--I will not suppose that a poor little animal could
provoke your anger, because it cried out when it suffered pain, and your
son excite your pity, when he cried out louder, and suffered nothing.

I am obliged to you, my good friend, cried Sir Owen, that is just what I
would have said, if I could--Rachel Owen said nothing, but answered with
a look, that I am neither able nor ambitious to describe. In that moment
vanished her respect for De Lancaster, and something was adopted in its
stead of a less innocent and gentle quality. She took her sulky sobbing
brat by the hand, and left the room without apology. The coach was
announced, and De Lancaster rose to take his leave--You see how it is
with me, said Sir Owen; I have admired an angel, and henceforth renounce
all hope of her: such a whelp and such a shrew, as I am now coupled to,
will shortly make an end of me.

De Lancaster shook his friend by the hand, walked silently through the
hall to his coach, which conveyed him home in safety, time not having
sufficed for the fat coachman to get more than three parts tipsy, and
the fat horses being, as was usual with them, perfectly sober and
acquainted with the road.




CHAPTER IV.

_The Family of De Lancaster return to Kray-Castle. Our History mends its
Pace._


De Lancaster and his daughter, meditating on the occurrences, that had
passed at their visit, particularly on the expressions, that had fallen
from Sir Owen upon their taking leave, observed a profound silence for
some time after they had left the Abbey. Philip’s thoughts did not in
any degree harmonize with their’s, for he was ruminating on the charms
of Mrs. Owen, and, as the coach was slowly moving up a steep ascent,
promulgated his opinion, that nothing could be more agreeable and
engaging than the very lady, who to them had appeared in so opposite a
character.

No notice was taken of this _dictum_, for Philip had such a muttering
way of delivering his wise sayings, as made them seem like speeches
addressed to nobody in company, and of course entitled to no answer from
any body. Philip however, who had laid down his proposition in general
terms, proceeded now to branch into particulars, and these produced the
following brief dialogue between son and father; the former carrying it
on in the character of proponent, the latter as respondent.

Mrs. Owen is very delicately made. I like slender limbs.

They suit well with slender likings.

She has a great deal of wit, and I am sure you thought so, for you
talked a great deal to her.

And to very little purpose it should seem.

She did not like Sir Owen to correct her child.

Then she should have taken the trouble out of his hands, for the boy
deserved correction, and I am afraid will shortly become incorrigible.

Here the alternation paused, and Cecilia, turning to her father,
said--What is it in the countenance of that boy, which, when I look upon
him, causes me to shudder?

It is, said the father, because you read his character in his features,
and are persuaded, that the child, who sets out by tormenting a poor
helpless dog, will in time grow up to be the tormentor of a poor
helpless man. I own there is something in the boy repulsive to my
nature.

He has fine eyes, said Philip.

They are indications of his mind, and give fair warning, replied De
Lancaster; so far they may merit what you say of them.

I hope, rejoined Cecilia, my dear little nephew in no future time will
form acquaintance or connection with him. He never will be cruel I am
sure; his little hands already are held out to every living thing he
sees, and his sweet smile bespeaks humanity.

Yes, and as surely as he lives, my dear, replied De Lancaster, his hands
will be held out to all his fellow creatures in distress, or I am a
false prophet. As for my friend Sir Owen, I pity him from my heart, poor
man. His last words made a strong impression on me. If he submits to
keep these plagues about him, I fear he will never know another happy
day.

Philip’s opinion of Mrs. Owen was not altered, but his fund of
conversation was exhausted, so he said no more, and the coach discharged
its freight in the port, from which it had set out.

As we hold it matter of conscience not to keep our readers any longer in
the nursery, we must here avail ourselves of our privilege, and pass
very slightly over a period of our hero’s life, which does not furnish
us with matter sufficiently interesting to be recorded in these memoirs.
As we profess to give the history of the human mind, we trust it will be
allowed us to present our John De Lancaster to the reader as a boy,
whose thoughts and actions were no longer merely neutral, but such as
might naturally lead to the developement of that character, which he was
destined to exhibit in his more advanced maturity. For the present we
shall content ourselves with observing that, although the age, when
education ought to have begun, was now gone by, still the question of
what species that education should be, whether public or private, was
not decided.

Within this period the following letters, under different dates from the
West Indies, had reached the hands of Mrs. Philip De Lancaster.

               “_From Captain Jones--Letter the first._

                     “Madam,

     “In a few days after I had arrived at my destination I fell ill,
     and my disorder soon assumed those appearances, which in this
     country are considered to afford but little chance of a recovery.
     The wife and daughter of my friend Major Parsons, who came
     passengers with me in the same transport, with a benignity, that
     exposed their lives to danger, under Providence saved me from
     death.

     “Unfortunately for the younger of my preservers, she conceived so
     strong an attachment, that I must have been the most unfeeling and
     the most ungrateful of all men could I have remained insensible to
     her partiality. Her health became in danger, and both her father
     and mother, well apprised of the cause of it, offered and even
     solicited me to accept her hand in marriage, and I did not
     withstand their joint appeal.

     “Thus, after your example, I have married, and I am persuaded, that
     my wife, had she the honour of being known to you, would please you
     by the gentleness of her character and the unaffected modesty of
     her manners. I have stationed her in a little cottage near
     adjoining to the barracks, and in a healthy situation; but her
     father Major Parsons is like myself a soldier of fortune, and our
     establishment is proportioned to our means.

     “I write by this conveyance to lay her jointly with myself at the
     feet of my benevolent patron your ever-honoured father. She
     presumes to send you a few tropical fruits of her own preserving,
     and hopes you will condescend to accept of them together with her
     most humble respects and unfeigned good wishes.

                    I have the honour to be,
                               Madam, &c. &c.
                                     JOHN JONES.”

The second letter from Captain Jones, of a date posterior by about a
year to the foregoing, is as follows--

              “Madam,

     “Alas, that I must trouble you with my sorrows! I have lost my
     wife; my poor Amelia is no more. She was a being of so mild a
     nature, that were I conscious of a single word, which ever passed
     my lips to give her pain, I never should have peace of mind again.
     The ravages of this exterminating fever are tremendous: she fell
     before it almost without a struggle. The affliction of her parents
     is extreme, and I am told the sternest soldier in my company, that
     followed her body to the grave, could not refrain from tears, for
     every soul that knew her, loved and lamented her. She has left an
     infant daughter, in whose tender features I trace a perfect
     miniature of her whom I have lost. As soon as ever her afflicted
     grandmother can be induced to part from her, I mean to rescue her
     from this infernal climate, and consign her to the motherly care
     and protection of my kind friend and relation Mrs. Jennings, who
     resides at Denbigh--

     “Oh Madam, you, who know the inmost feelings of my breaking heart,
     will you in pity look upon my child, the legacy of my Amelia, my
     all in this world, and perhaps before this letter reaches you, the
     only relict of your wretched friend?

                   I have the honour, &c. &c.
                                    JOHN JONES.”

This letter was soon followed by the melancholy tidings of poor Jones’s
death; his infant child Amelia had in the mean time arrived, and was
placed under the care of Mrs. Jennings above-mentioned, who by the
bounty of old Morgan, was liberally rewarded with a pension for her
education of the orphan.




CHAPTER V.

_Puerile Anecdotes of our Hero John De Lancaster._


Although Mr. De Lancaster in one of his prophetic moments had
pronounced, that the mother of our hero would conceive a more than
ordinary love and affection for her infant, the event did not exactly
verify the prediction: sorrow had benumbed her heart: she had so long
fed upon it in secrecy and silence, that all the little energy, which
nature had originally endowed her with, was lost. From her husband she
derived no comfort, and for the maternal duties she was totally unfit.
The accommodating contract she had entered into with Philip for all
nuptial emancipation in future, was so religiously observed on both
sides, that it did not seem in the order of things natural, that the
heir of the family would ever be saddled with a provision for younger
children.

Young John, who had occasioned much trouble and annoyance to his mother
by inadvertently coming into the world, before he was expected, seemed
likely to go out of it without experiencing the care of any other parent
than the benevolent Cecilia; for Mr. Philip De Lancaster, as I have
before hinted, had married without any other moving cause than what
operated upon him through the strainers of his father’s recommendation
and advice, and was not remarkably uxorious. On the contrary, as the
embers of affection were not vivid in his bosom, and as there is reason
to believe he did not take much pains to kindle them in the bosom of his
lady, it may be presumed, that he was as little studious to find
consolation for her sorrows, as she was to interrupt his indolence, or
to resent his indifference.--Amusements she had none, and occupations
extremely few: she discharged herself from all attention to family hours
and family meals; eat and slept by herself, received no company and paid
no visits, alive to little else but the reports, which at stated times
she expected and received from Mrs. Jennings at Denbigh of little
Amelia’s health and improvement, whom at the same time she had not
energy enough to visit, whilst her father was a prisoner at Glen-Morgan
under the coercion of two inexorable keepers, old age and gout. She had
a servant Betty Wood, an ancient maiden and as melancholy as herself,
who now and then read homilies to her, and now and then worked carpeting
and quilted counterpanes, over which she regaled herself with hymns,
sung in a most sleep-inviting key to adagio movements, that scarce moved
at all. This work of hers, like that of the chaste Penelope, was without
end or object; for it rarely failed to happen that, before the task was
finished, Mrs. De Lancaster had changed her fancy as to the pattern, and
destroyed perhaps in a few minutes what patient Betty had been employed
upon for months: her carpets never covered the floor, nor did her
counterpanes ever ornament the beds.

As Mr. Philip De Lancaster had no further punctilios to observe towards
his lady, he seemed to think that nothing more could be required of him
towards his son except to measure his growth from year to year by
notches in the wainscot of the steward’s parlour, which are there
remaining to this hour as records of the extraordinary vegetative
powers, with which dame Nature had endowed the object of these memoirs.
Cecilia would fain have had her little nephew brought into the room
after dinner, but it was not often she was indulged in that wish, as the
old gentleman did not approve of the custom; and once, when the good
aunt was rather more importunate than was usual with her, he told her,
that the practice of introducing noisy children and prattling nurses
into the guest-room was so justly reprobated by all civilized societies,
that the citizens of Abydos became notorious to a proverb for their ill
manners in that particular, and were the laughing-stock of the more
refined Athenians--And should not you and I, said he, like the aforesaid
citizens, deserve to be the ridicule of our neighbours, if, instead of
entertaining them with the conversation of the table, we should treat
them with the din and gabble of a nursery?--From these, or any other
authorities, when abetted by her father, it was not Cecilia’s practice
to appeal, though perhaps she longed to observe to him, that his
neighbours were not in all respects exactly like the _refined
Athenians_.

De Lancaster nevertheless was extremely fond of his grandson, and once
in every forenoon had him brought into his library, where he would hear
him say the little lessons, that his aunt had taught him, and sometimes
with great good humour tell him stories, and repeat fables, which had
always some point of instruction couched under the moral of them, upon
which however the narrator was in the habit of descanting rather longer
than would have answered his purpose, had that been only to amuse the
hearer; but as this history does not undertake to record every incident,
that occurred during the boyish years of our hero, we shall content
ourselves with observing, that, as he advanced in strength and stature,
he gave proofs of a very early aptitude towards all athletic exercises
within the compass of his powers. He scrambled up the crags, forded the
gullies and braved the inclemencies of climate, with any boy of his age,
however bold or hardy.

That the only son and heir of a family so ancient, rich and respectable
should be indulged in these adventures, would not seem very natural,
but that his aunt could not, and his father would not, follow him in
these excursions, whilst every body else about the castle conspired to
encourage him in them, and applauded him for his resolution.

His great ambition was to rival young David Williams, son of the blind
minstrel, in the manly art of horsemanship. This hardy lad performed his
errands to the post office and market of the neighbouring town on a
poney, who yielded to none of Welch extraction in obstinacy and
determined disobedience to controul. He had more ingenious devices to
dislodge young David from his back, than young David had resources at
all times ready to disappoint and thwart him in his contrivances; and
hence it rarely came to pass, that the horse and his rider did not part
company before the expedition was complete and at an end. If David was
by chance encharged with frangible commodities, nobody could ensure upon
a worse bottom. Poney had not a single friend in house or stable; every
soul gave him an ill name; but some enjoyed to witness his malicious
tricks, whilst to others David always set out with an assurance, that he
would master him, and generally came home with tokens, that gave ocular
demonstration to the contrary.

One evening as David was returning home through the park with a cargo of
sundries in a basket, and just then in high good humour with his poney,
he was met by his friend John exactly at the pass, where the two roads
branched off, the one towards the castle, and the other to the stables.
David’s business carried him to the house, but the poney was disposed
to carry him and his business to the stable. This begat a difference of
opinions on the spot, and the dispute soon begat blows, which were
manfully laid on by the rider, and passionately resented by the
receiver. After a sufficient number of indecisive plunges, which brought
the basket of miscellaneous articles to the ground, but left the rider
only a little forwarder on his saddle than was quite convenient, poney
seemed in the humour to compromise the question between the two roads by
taking neither; but bolted forwards at full speed towards the hah-hah,
that bounded the pleasure ground, upon the very brink of which he made a
sudden stop, and throwing up his heels at the same instant with his head
between his knees, he completely effected his purpose by pitching his
jockey into the aforesaid hah-hah, which, luckily for its visitor, was
just then full of water.

When John, who had been spectator of the contest, had assisted his
friend in getting out of the water, and found all bones whole, he
repaired to the stable, where the contumacious poney was still standing
at the door, and, arming himself, with David’s whip, proceeded to mount.
This was a new demand, which the poney could by no means reconcile to
his feelings; the battle instantly commenced; and victory hung between
them for a while without any seeming partiality to either side: many a
time they came to the ground together, but never parted; till at length,
after plenty of restive manœuvres, and a pretty many Welch
remonstrances, poney gave in, and, to the immortal honour of our young
Antæus, ever after became as tractable as a turn-spit.




CHAPTER VI.

_Education stands still. The Seeds of Enmity are sown. The Incident of
the dying Soldier._


Whilst our hero was thus gaining laurels in the field by his bodily
achievements, in mental attainments he made no great progress. His good
aunt Cecilia laboured hard at her English lessons, but his play-fellows
and companions without any labour kept him in such practice with their
Welch, that between both languages he was in danger of speaking neither.
Still his kind instructress persevered in teaching him such things as
she could teach and he could learn, but although he was now advanced
beyond the age, when boys in general turn out to public schools, the
parties, which sate in council on the specific mode of education to be
pursued, were so wide of an adjustment, that it might well be made a
doubt if he was in any way of being educated at all.

Mr. Philip De Lancaster had naturally so little interest in his own
opinions upon this, or any other question, that he parted from them upon
the easiest terms, and took them back again upon the slightest reasons.
He had been heard to say that something should be thought of for him,
but the task of thinking was a task he did not concern himself about. If
the decision between public and private education had rested upon
Philip, his casting vote would have been as mere a matter of chance, as
the cast of the dice.

Mrs. De Lancaster, the mother, who never opened upon this subject,
except once to Cecilia, expressed her opinion that the question was of
no importance: he was his father’s son, and educate him how they would,
he would still be his son, and education could not mend him.

Cecilia was humbly of opinion, that the subject was above her, and
properly belonged to the other sex to consider and decide. She observed
however that Colonel Wilson had given his sons a public education, and
she believed he had no cause to repent of it: this was evidently a lure
to hook him into the debate, and a pretty clear insinuation which way
her judgment and her wishes pointed. But the master-opinion, which alone
could resolve, and carry resolution into effect, was still to be sought
for in the bosom of the grandfather, and he did not seem in haste to
bring it forth.

If it were put to me in the way of question, he said to Cecilia, whether
I am prepared to recommend a public school, I answer, no: if you should
persist to ask what other system I would recommend, I should observe to
you, that system is subordinate to nature, and that none such ought to
be laid down, till it is apparent and made clear to what the genius of
my grandson points. When I make use of the term genius, let me not be
understood as if admitting any inborn influence, which might seem to
favour the absurd chimeras about innate ideas. I am aware that Sophocles
in his Ajax asserts, that the happiness of man consists only in his
ignorance: in his ignorance of such things, as would make man miserable
did he know them, his happiness may indeed be said to consist; and so
far only I can agree with Sophocles; for ignorance, in its proper sense,
can make no man happy; on the contrary I hold it as a truth
incontrovertible, that, if any human being could be perfect in virtue,
he would be perfect in wisdom also; and if such be the test of wisdom,
how can ignorance be said to make him happy? Now if the wisdom of virtue
is to be instilled into the young pupil by the wisdom of books, it must
surely be by other books, than his masters in the dead languages may
always happen to select for his instruction in those languages. Cicero
wrote about the cardinal virtues, as he was pleased to call them, and it
is not quite clear to me, that suicide was not one of the family: in
fact, his book is good for nothing; the man was a follower of the New
Academy, and of course could have no opinion: his ambition was to talk
about every thing, and his maxim to decide upon nothing. You, my
excellent Cecilia, can for the present teach your nephew what he ought
to know, and perhaps if he never learns what you cannot teach, he will
have no loss. You will instil into his heart religion in its purest
principles--in teaching that, you teach him every thing.

When this honest, but eccentric, man had thus unluckily entrenched
himself on the wrong side of a clear question, he could find so many
specious arguments of this sort for doing nothing, that of course
nothing was done; and the mind of the neglected boy, now thirsting for
instruction, found every avenue shut against him, except that only,
which had little new to afford.

It so happened that Colonel Wilson had been called away upon an exchange
of his government for one of rather more emolument in a distant
situation, where he had been obliged to reside for a certain term upon
his first taking possession. This was a heavy loss to young John, who
had the mortification to hear the wit and understanding of David Owen
cried up and applauded, whilst he himself was let to remain in a state
little short of dereliction. Once or twice he was admitted to the honour
of standing by his father, whilst he angled in the canal; but John saw
no amusement in watching a float, that never once gave the signal of a
bite. In Cecilia’s flower garden he took some small delight, but it was
pleasure of too tame a sort to satisfy his ardent mind.

One morning when Sir Owen’s fox hounds were to throw off in Kray wood,
he was permitted to put himself under the convoy of the groom, and go
out to see them find; but alas, he was destined to exhibit himself on
the back of the reformed poney, late the letter-carrier and drudge of
the castle; when the first object, that struck his sight, was the fine
young heir of Penruth Abbey, mounted on a full-sized hunter, and dressed
in a uniform of green and scarlet. He was accompanied by several
gentlemen in the same uniform, and, Sir Owen not being in the field,
seemed to act as master of the hunt. When the hounds began to challenge
in the cover, the sportsmen were in motion, and poor John, conscious of
his unworthiness to enrol himself amongst them, struck down a narrow
lane, that skirted the wood and led towards the castle by the shortest
cut. The country had been drenched with rain, and whilst John and poney
were bustling through this muddy pass, young Owen gallopped swiftly by,
and having spitefully contrived to sluice him, (man and horse,) all over
with the dirty soil, looked back and laughed.--Never mind, master
Johnny, cried the groom: sportsman’s fare--Not aware that the injury,
which the poor little fellow had received, was not confined to his
clothes, for upon drawing up and dismounting, which agony compelled John
to do without delay, not only his face was cut with the flinty rubbish,
that had been thrown up by the heels of Owen’s horse, but his eyes had
suffered much more seriously, so that he was obliged to be led home with
his handkerchief bound over his eyes, suffering the whilst intolerable
pain. What passed on his arrival at the castle need not be described: it
was some weeks before the skill of Mr. Llewellyn, and the tender care of
Cecilia, could be fairly said to have perfected the cure. No
intercourse in the mean time passed between the abbey and the castle,
and, if it was known at the former place (which there is good reason to
think it was) neither enquiry nor apology ever reached the latter.

Whilst the groom enraged the lower regions of Kray Castle with his
account of the malicious feat, John was quite as capable of
distinguishing between design and accident, and with fewer words, but
deeper meditation, laid up the insult in his mind, never to be
forgotten.

During the time that the boy, in consequence of this injury, was
interdicted from resorting to his book, impatient to be learning
something, he turned his thoughts towards blind Williams, who repeated
verses and played to him on the harp; which to enjoy, he would sit for
hours, with the shade over his bloodshot eyes, sympathizing with old
David on the lamentable loss of sight, and enquiring if it was attended
by that misery, which his imagination attached to it.

It chanced one day, whilst sitting in this attitude by the side of the
minstrel, he was solicited for his charity by a worn-out soldier, who
had fallen sick upon his way, and had been admitted into the house by
the servants for the purpose of relieving him in his distress. John
lifted up the shade from off his eyes, to look at him, and the
melancholy spectacle, which, through the misty medium of his feeble
optics, he imperfectly discerned, struck so hard upon his feeling heart,
that he suffered the very keenest pang, that pity could inflict. Food,
clothes, medicine, bed, every thing, that could relieve a suffering
fellow creature at the point to die, was immediately to be prepared. The
soldier’s tale was short; for in the history of his sufferings there was
a mournful uniformity: wounds and hard service in unhealthy climates had
made him old in the mid-stage of life; poverty and privation had
depressed his hardy vigour, and sickness, consequencial of those evils,
had at length broken down a gallant spirit, which, under these
accumulated visitations, could no longer struggle with its destiny.

John heard this sad recital of his woe with sympathizing tears; but when
he came to relate how cruelly he had been threatened and dismissed by
the young lord of a fine great house in the neighbourhood, (describing
Penruth Abbey) whilst begging charity at the door, where he saw the very
dogs fed with bread, for want of which he was starving, our
heart-struck hero started from his seat, and, stamping vehemently on the
floor, exclaimed--Let me but live to bring that Jew-born wretch to
shame, and let me die the death, I care not; tis enough!--Then turning
to the servants, he said--Take notice; my grandfather, your master, has
charity in his heart, and will not suffer this poor man to perish
through the want of any thing, that he can give. Let him therefore want
for nothing; when you have given him what he ought to have, take him to
a well-aired bed in a comfortable room, and send for Mr. Llewellyn to
attend upon him. I’ll answer for my orders--The soldier overpowered with
gratitude, only murmured out his thanks: blind David sung out
loudly--Heaven reward thee, my sweet child! Thou art a true De
Lancaster!




CHAPTER VII.

_The Soldier takes leave of our young Hero. Delivers to him a Pacquet he
was entrusted with, and dies._


Next morning, when the sun had risen, and old Robert De Lancaster was
attended upon, as usual, by David Williams, he enquired after the sick
soldier, which he understood had been taken into the house by the order
of his grand-son John. This drew from Williams a recital, much more
circumstantial, than had yet been made to him of that event. He gave the
very words, that John had uttered in resentment of young Owen’s
inhumanity, and they were deeply felt. De Lancaster remained silent for
a time, and gave no signal to the blind musician; at length he
said--Williams, my mind is agitated: give me something soothing, and
let it be a simple melody--I have hastily put together a kind of
ballad-melody of that very sort, replied the minstrel, which occurred to
me whilst reflecting upon young Mr. Owen’s want of charity to the poor
soldier, and, if it is your pleasure, I will recite it to the harp--Let
me hear it, said the master, and the minstrel sung as follows--

    “I’m sick, said the soldier, and cover’d with scars,
    “Behold the sad fruit I have reap’d in your wars!
    “Have pity, good master, I’m feeble and old,
    “I’m weary, and starving with hunger and cold.

    “Begone from my door, and appeal to the laws,
    “I am not of your country, nor friend to your cause:--
    “Thus answer’d the merciless squire in his pride,
    “And thus with disdain a young angel replied--

    “What ails thee, what ails thee, thou miserly elf,
    “To be hoarding and hugging thy rascally pelf?
    “See where old father care strews his thorns in thy bed,
    “And terrible death waves his dart o’er thy head.

    “Let thy cash buy the blessing and pray’r of the poor,
    “And let them intercede when death comes to thy door;
    “They perhaps may appease that importunate pow’r,
    “When thy coffers can’t buy the reprieve of an hour.

    “Foolish man, don’t you know ev’ry grain of your gold
    “May give food to the hungry and warmth to the cold?
    “A purchase in this world shall soon pass away,
    “But a treasure in Heaven will never decay.

    “Now tell me what pleasure you reap from your hoard,
    “And I’ll tell you what rapture your dross might afford;
    “Amid numberless joys I will name only these--
    “Gay days, happy nights and a conscience at ease.

    “Do you think, sordid wretch, when you turn a deaf ear
    “To the suit of the orphan that God does not hear?
    “Do you hope to escape from the searcher of hearts,
    “When the tear of the widow no pity imparts?

    “When the ag’d and infirm vainly put up their pray’r
    “For that mite, which your mass without missing could spare,
    “The angel of vengeance your crime will enroll
    “Amongst those of the demons, who murder the soul.

    “Give a shilling to-day, and the joy you’ll derive,
    “To-morrow shall swell your small tribute to five;
    “Progressive delight ev’ry hour shall encrease,
    “And at length a few guineas shall purchace your peace.

    “If you spurn my advice, you’re a blockhead and dunce,
    “You cannot serve God and your Idol at once;
    “Who traffics with Mammon will find in the end,
    “He has made a bad bargain, and lost a good friend.”

De Lancaster had always a kind word upon his lips for his old blind
minstrel, and having told him that he had added another leaf to his
laurel, went down to his family assembled in the breakfast room with all
that charity in his heart, which the ditty had recommended.

When the story of the soldier had been heard by Mr. Philip De Lancaster,
he coolly observed, that it was a trick to extort money; he would not
take the soldier’s word for a farthing, and did not believe young Owen
capable of any thing cruel or uncharitable.

When it was related to Cecilia, she threw her arms about the neck of the
benevolent boy, pressed him to her bosom, and prayed Heaven to preserve
him from the malice of that spiteful imp, whose evil-boding visage
haunted her both day and night.

When the mother of John was informed of the circumstance, and
understood that the man, who laid sick in the house was a soldier, she
sent Betty Wood to enquire of him what regiment he belonged to, and when
answer was brought that he was invalided from the 15th foot in the West
Indies, and private in the company of the late Captain John Jones, whom
he should ever bewail as the kindest master and the best of friends, it
seemed as if the fountain of her tears was never to be exhausted. An
irresistible desire possessed her to see the man, and, after certain
preparatory manœuvres, conducted by faithful Betty, she actually carried
her resolution into effect, and entered the chamber of the soldier,
planting Betty at the door to prevent interruption. As he had been
selected from the ranks by Captain Jones, as his domestic servant, he
had many anecdotes to relate, highly interesting to the hearer, and
very honourable to his late master: he spoke also warmly in the praise
of his deceased lady, and in raptures of his dear little Amelia, with
whom it seems he had come over to England in the pacquet, and, after
many adventures and misfortunes, was on his way to visit her at Denbigh,
when sickness overtook and reduced him to the condition, in which the
charity of her angel son had found him.

He was now exhausted, and Mrs. De Lancaster forbore to press upon him
any more enquiries: she bade him be assured that he should never want;
she would pension him for life; she would settle him at Glen-Morgan in
the neighbourhood of Denbigh, and, if ever she became possessed of that
estate, he should be taken into her house, and pass the remainder of
his days in ease and competency.

Alas, good lady, feebly he replied, I have but few more days on this
side the grave, and them I must employ in asking mercy of my God, and
imploring blessings on your son, who has been to me as an angel before
death.

This said, she left him, and retired unseen to her chamber. John was
soon after heard, as usual, at her door, and admitted.

Come to my arms, she cried, my dear, my noble boy! Did you but know how
I feel and why I feel your charity to that poor soldier, you would not
wonder at the tears I shed, whilst thus I press you to a breaking heart.
But you will know me after I am dead, and that time is not far off.
Leave me, my child; I shall not often send for you; my sorrows must be
only to myself. Go, go, be happy! I am very ill. Send Wood; and leave
the room.

In the forenoon of the day next ensuing, young John De Lancaster visited
the poor soldier; he was dying, but found strength to say--God bless you
and farewell! Had I been relieved when I begged charity of that
neighbouring gentleman, who turned me from his door, I think I might
have lived, but I fainted soon after, and all your goodness could not
save me. He then reached out his hand, and delivered to John a small
leathern purse, which he prayed him to open. It contained a plain gold
ring, which Captain Jones had given him in charge for his daughter
Amelia, being the wedding ring of her mother: could he have reached
Denbigh, he had delivered it to her: he had been strongly beset by
hunger more than once, but he had resisted every impulse to part from
it, and had fulfilled his trust at the expence of his life: he now
committed the deposit to the care of one, who he was sure would
faithfully convey the legacy to its proper owner, and he devoutly prayed
to heaven, that it might prove a blessing to the wearer--John took the
ring, and assured him it should never pass from any other hands but his
into those of Amelia Jones.

In the evening of that day the soldier died.

       *       *       *       *       *

Have patience with me, kind and courteous reader! I am not leading you
into the regions of romance: I aim not to surprise you; but I am aiming
to find out, (if haply nature shall direct my hand) that clue, which,
rightly followed, may empower me to unravel the recesses of your heart.
This is my object; in attempting this, success, however short of
triumph, will repay me; but, if I wholly fail, my labour’s lost; I have
no second hope.


                        END OF THE SECOND BOOK.




                            BOOK THE THIRD.




CHAPTER I.

_Early Efforts of our Hero’s Genius._


John’s attachment to the harp of David Williams inspired him with a
desire for being taught a few easy tunes by so great a master. In this
ambition he was warmly encouraged by his grandfather, who considered it
as the unequivocal characteristic of a true De Lancaster, and boldly
predicted that he would rapidly advance to hereditary celebrity on that
ancient and noble instrument.

Upon this occasion we should have been sorry if De Lancaster had failed
to recollect, that both Hercules and Alexander condescended to take
lessons on the harp, tho’ the former broke his masters head with his
own instrument, and the latter insisted upon his privilege of striking
the wrong string, whenever it suited him better than the right. Robert
therefore found it necessary to caution his grandson against copying
those boisterous scholars, and strictly enjoined him to give close
attention to the instructions of his master, after the example of the
Cretan youths, who were universally educated in music, and remarkably
obedient to their teachers.

John accordingly sate down with eagerness for the undertaking, and in
point of diligence few Cretans could have exceeded him; but when
unexpected difficulties began to stare him in the face, and every lesson
seemed to increase those difficulties, his ardour cooled and despair
possessed him wholly. David Williams at length pronounced _ex
cathedrâ_, that his pupil had positively no genius for the instrument;
the case was hopeless, and the harp was laid aside.

I am sorry for it, said the grandfather, but I am myself no performer on
the harp, though a lover of its melody, and sure I am that no man can
possess a spirit prepared to meet the vicissitudes of fortune with
equanimity and calmness, unless his passions have been disciplined by
music. Let the boy’s genius therefore be watched, and, if it points to
any other instrument, indulge him.

Shortly after the promulgation of this edict the musical propensities of
the discarded harper began to shew themselves in a very different
character, and he now conceived a passion for performing on the
trumpet.

Be it so! said the grandfather; it proves at least his spirit has a
martial cast.

Colonel Wilson was now returned, and heard with infinite delight the
story of the dead soldier, told by Cecilia so greatly to the credit of
his darling boy John; but when his friend De Lancaster told him with an
air of triumph of his reigning passion for the trumpet, he treated it as
a jest, and ridiculed the idea. Disappointed by this reception, and
somewhat piqued, De Lancaster was determined to stand to his defences,
and that Wilson, who had arraigned the trumpet, should be doomed to hear
the trumpet’s advocate.

Sir, said he, you will permit me to remind you, that the trumpet is an
ancient and a venerable instrument. If it be said that the walls of the
city of Thebes were raised by the lute of Amphion, we have better
authority for believing that the walls of Jericho were thrown down by
the trumpets of the Israelitish Priests.

I hope, replied Wilson, the trumpet of my friend John will not be quite
so efficacious. If the castle tumbles down with the blast, we may chance
to be buried in its ruins.

Wilson had better have left this skit alone, for his friend was at no
time guilty of giving his hearers too little information, and he was
just now put upon his mettle to discuss the merits of the insulted
trumpet under its three denominations according to the respective
characters, in which the ancients employed, and have described it. The
first of these, he told him, was the _tuba_, or straight trumpet,
properly so called: the second was the _lituus_, or shrill-toned
trumpet, curved at the extremity: the third and last the _cornuus_, or
deep-toned horn, of natural conformation, curved throughout: of these
the chief was the _tuba_ first named, which he informed him was unknown
to the Greeks, though not to Homer, who did not employ it in his
battles, knowing it was not then in use.

He was right in not doing so, said Wilson; but if he had done otherwise,
I, for one, should never have found him out.

Whether Wilson imagined that his friend had done with his trumpets it is
impossible to say, but it is very easy to believe that he was not aware
how many he had in petto, for he seemed astonished when given to
understand, that there were not less than six different sorts of the
tuba, as classed by Eustathius into that of the Athenians, invented by
Minerva; the Egyptian trumpet, contrived by Osiris, and employed in
their sacrifices; the trumpet of the Gauls, with a peculiar mouthpiece,
of a shrill tone, and by them called Carynx; the Paphlagonian trumpet,
mouthed like a bull and very deep-toned; that of the Medes, blown with a
reed, also of a deep tone, and lastly, the Tyrrhenian trumpet, extremely
acute and high-pitched in conformity to which it is supposed the Romans
modelled their’s.

Scarcely was this edifying dissertation finished, when the hall
resounded with a blast, loud enough, it should seem, to shake its aged
banners into tatters: Wilson hastened to the scene of action, and found
his friend John under the tuition not of any of the great masters
above-mentioned, but of a puppet-show man, who travelled the country,
and recommended himself by the strength, rather than by the sweetness,
of his tones. This gentleman, who had just recruited his lungs with an
emollient dose of sweet Welch ale, blew with might and main in return
for the hospitality he had received, and doubtless for the honour of the
corps he belonged to. The Goddess Fame never gave a louder crack for the
best favourite she had, though he were standing at her back, and, like
the bellows-blower of an organ, had pumped breath into her lungs to let
the people hear his own good deeds. The performer, who was an adept in
more arts than one, had just then played a somerset, to the great
delight of his pupil John, and was standing on his hands with his heels
erect in the air, when Mrs. Elizabeth Wood entering the hall, and seeing
a pair of human legs in an attitude so totally irreconcileable to her
idea of the proper place, which human legs ought to hold in society,
uttered, as in duty bound, a most violent scream, and in the same breath
announced an order for silencing that horrid trumpet; it had nearly
thrown her lady into fits. That ancient and venerable instrument, (so
called by Mr. De Lancaster) was accordingly for ever laid aside, and
Scaramouch was fain to make his retreat without sound of trumpet; but as
he could tumble, conjure and shew tricks, that would give no offence to
the nervous system of the lady above stairs, it is probable that both
the ladies and gentlemen below stairs suffered him to entertain them
before he left the castle; and as he very politely invited them to be
present at the opening of his theatre in the village, when Punch and
his company would present them with the entertaining interlude of the
Rape of the Sabines, with appropriate screamings by the ladies concerned
in the representation, it is presumed, that not a few of them were
prevailed upon to be present at that interesting exhibition.

The shock, that Mrs. De Lancaster had received, was by no means feigned.
She had now become a confirmed hypochondriac, and great alarm was
sounded forth by Mr. Llewellyn of an approaching decay, that he
endeavoured to stem by an unceasing course of medicines, which if they
had suited her case, were certainly not sparingly administered; but, as
she regularly grew worse and worse, it occasioned some to doubt whether
they had even the merit of being innocently neutral.

Thus ended the second abortive effort of our hero’s genius in the
musical department. Not totally discouraged, but cautious of annoying
his unhappy mother, he now betook himself to the humble Jew’s-harp,
whose sibilous strains by long practice and unwearied assiduity he so
contrived to modulate and diversify, as obtained for him the reputation,
amongst the servants at least, of executing some of the familiar Welch
airs in a style, that seemed the very echo of David Williams’s harp.

For this small accomplishment he was indebted to his genius only: There
were however other arts, in which he exercised himself under tuition. By
the favour of the gamekeeper he became an expert shooter at a mark, and,
since Colonel Wilson had returned, he put himself under the command of
his servant, a disabled veteran, who taught him to perform all the
motions of the manual and platoon so correctly, that the effects of this
discipline soon became conspicuous in the firmness of his step, and the
uprightness of his carriage.

When report was made to De Lancaster of his grandson’s wonderful
performances on the Jew’s-harp, he expressed more joy on the occasion
than the meanness of the instrument seemed to merit, and immediately
signified his pleasure, that the young minstrel should be summoned to
the dinner-room, where he was then sitting with Colonel Wilson, and at
the same time ordered the servant to bring the harp after him, for that
he would himself witness his performance.

When the servant had gone out to find the performer, the old gentleman
intimated to Wilson, that he hoped he would have his harp put in order
before he brought it with him, as he did not greatly relish the ceremony
of tuning--I confess, added he, I am curious to see the construction of
this Jewish harp; though I dare say it is the harp with crooked arms,
described by Hyginus, and played upon with the plectrum, which I am bold
to affirm was the practice of king David.

To all this Wilson maliciously made no other reply, but that he believed
the harp had crooked arms.--I was sure of it, said De Lancaster. Upon
the word, young John came in, and being asked where his harp was,
immediately applied it to his lips, and began to twang it in his very
best manner. In the name of wonder, exclaimed De Lancaster, what is the
boy about? Is he playing on the plectrum? No, cried he, I am going to
give you Shenkin.

He went on, and the grandfather heard him out, charmed into silence by
the novelty and ingenuity of the performance. When he had played the
air, which he did with great correctness of imitation, in the style of
David Williams, the old gentleman, turning to him with a smile,
said--Well, my good boy, you have done your part, and though your harp,
I confess, has disappointed me, your art has made up for it. This is the
first time I ever knew the harp was a wind instrument, and if the Jews
have the credit of inventing your machine, you have the credit of making
music out of it. Then, addressing himself to Colonel Wilson, he
observed, that the exact manner, in which he had imitated the style of
David Williams, brought to his recollection Ælian’s anecdote of the
famous Polygnotus of Thasos, whose magnificent paintings were so
correctly copied in miniature by Dionysius of Colophon, as to preserve
the whole spirit and excellence of the original in all its due
proportions, though upon the smallest scale. Having examined the Jew’s
harp, he observed, that this was one more instrument than he had ever
seen, or heard of before, and asked who taught him. Upon his replying
that he had taught himself, he turned to Wilson with an air of triumph,
and said--This proves what I have always maintained, that nature is the
best instructress.

In some things perhaps, said the Colonel. I presume, not in all.

I am not sure, said De Lancaster, that exception should be made of any.
John had a master for the harp: he made nothing of it: he takes up that
paltry scrap of iron, and makes admirable music. Such is the difference
betwixt the natural emanations of genius, and the laboured efforts, that
are extorted from the pupil by the lessons of a teacher.

John, who probably foresaw something coming forward, which he was not
interested to partake of, now stept up to his grandfather, and asked
leave to ride over to Glen-Morgan, and pass a day there.--Why to pass a
day?--Because he would go over to Denbigh, and execute a little
commission, which the poor soldier on his death-bed had requested him to
fulfil.--Of what nature was that commission?--Simply to deliver a little
token to the daughter of Captain Jones, which that officer had entrusted
to the care of his faithful servant the soldier, but which the poor
fellow did not live to execute.--What was the little token he was to
carry?--Pray, don’t ask me that, said the youth, and above all things
don’t let my mother know a word about the matter. It would be very much
to the honour of the poor soldier, if I told you all; but I hope you
won’t require me to do that.--On no account, replied De Lancaster, will
I make any such demand upon you. If you will take my coach, ’tis at your
service; if you had rather ride, let Ben the groom attend you, and give
your orders accordingly.

John took the hand of his grandfather, kissed it, nodded with a smile to
the colonel, and hastened out of the room.

You have a treasure in that noble boy, said Wilson; but I hope, my good
friend, he will not be suffered to go on any longer without education,
because he can play upon the Jew’s-harp without a master. Don’t be
offended with me, if I seem to step out of my office, when I speak to
one of your great knowledge in the learned languages, but I presume you
hardly can expect your grandson to understand Greek and Latin, unless he
has a teacher.

Perhaps not, replied De Lancaster; yet, if it were so to happen, it
would not be the first wonder of the sort, that hath come to pass. It is
well known what prodigies of learning have started up into notice, even
in their infant years, and possessed themselves of arts, sciences and
languages, without being ever put into the trammels of a teacher.

Indeed! cried the colonel.

Assuredly, replied the assertor, though it may not have fallen in your
way to be certified of the fact. I could, if necessary, adduce a host
of witnesses to attest the wonders, that have been effected by the human
genius, unassisted with instruction; but as your profession, Colonel
Wilson, has probably occupied too much of your attention to allow of
your turning your thoughts to enquiries of this cast, the things I might
relate of Lipsius, of Quirino, Alphonsus Tostatus and many others of
equal celebrity might appear to you incredible.

Very likely, interjected the colonel.

Yet are they, every one, supported by irrefragable authorities. The mind
of man, my friend, is in itself a miracle, and persons, who have been
predestined to extraordinary occasions, have been born under
extraordinary circumstances, as was the case with Luther, who, whilst he
was yet an infant at the breast, maintained a Latin thesis against the
Pope’s infallibility, which gave rise to the saying, that he sucked in
controversy with his mother’s milk.

My very good and learned friend, said Wilson, that you have somewhere
crossed upon this idle legend, amongst the boundless mass of books that
you have consulted I am well persuaded; but that you will commit your
excellent understanding by stating it in serious proof of the question
we are upon I am loth to suppose. When I believe your account of
Luther’s coming into the world with a square cap and gown, I will
believe his thesis at the breast, and, when I believe that, I will not
dispute the story of the prolific lady, who was delivered of three
hundred and sixty-five children at a birth.

I dare say you will not dispute it, rejoined De Lancaster, when you
hear the evidences for the truth of it. The prolific lady, you allude
to, was the Countess Herman of Henneberg, daughter of Count Floris, Earl
of Holland, Zealand and Friesland, and son of William of Holland, first
of that name; Floris was treacherously slain by the old Earl of Clermont
at a public triumph, and left behind him this daughter Margaret, who
married the aforesaid Count Herman of Henneberg. She, despising the
petition of a poor widow, who with twins at her breast asked charity,
gave her very reproachful words withal; whereupon the widow, failing on
her knees, appealed to Heaven in vindication of her innocency, and
earnestly prayed, that as she had conceived and brought forth those two
infants lawfully by her husband, even so, if ever that lady should be
pregnant, she might be visited with as many children at a birth as
there were days in the year. Not long after, the lady conceived, and
went into Holland to visit the earl her brother, taking up her abode in
the abbey of religious women at Leyden, where on the Friday before Palm
Sunday in the year 1276 she was delivered of three hundred and
sixty-five children, the one half being sons and the other daughters,
but the odd babe was double-sexed. They were all baptised by Guydon,
suffragan to the bishop of Utrecht, who named all the sons John, and the
daughters Elizabeth, but what name he gave to the odd child, said De
Lancaster with much gravity, I must own to you I do not find recorded.

John-Elizabeth for a certainty, said the Colonel. It may be so, resumed
the narrator; but I hazard no conjectures, I only detail facts. They
were however no sooner baptised than they all died, and the mother
likewise. Their two baptismal basins are still preserved, and have been
by me seen and examined in the said church at Leyden, together with the
inscription on the Countess’s tomb in Latin and in Dutch, the former
beginning thus--_Margareta, Comitis Hennebergiæ uxor, et Florentii
Hollandiæ et Zelandiæ filia, &c. &c._ Underneath is the following
distich, the first line of which has been some how or other curtailed of
its proper metrical proportion, as you will perceive--

   --_En tibi monstrosum et memorabile factum,_
    _Quale nec a mundi conditione datum._

Here Robert De Lancaster, having closed his narrative, turned a look
upon his friend, that seemed to appeal to him for his judgment on the
case. The colonel made no reply, and it may be presumed that the
appellant set down his silence to the score of his conviction.




CHAPTER II.

_Our Hero’s Visit to Amelia Jones._


John and old Ben, carrying his personals in a pair of saddle bags, were
on their way to Glen-Morgan the next morning before sun-rise. Ben was an
excellent guide across Welch moors and mountains, and did not confine
himself to the roads, that were in use, but had the art of steering to
his point with great œconomy of time and distance. It was a gleam of joy
to poor old Morgan to behold his grandson, for he was fond and John was
affectionate. Every body in the house ran to pay him their respects: the
green and red liveries were taken off their pegs, and dinner was served
up in state as to the heir-apparent. The parson, lawyer and apothecary
were in their places, the old butler in gala, and Mrs. Richards with her
attendant housemaids in high requisition.

After an early breakfast the next morning John set off for Denbigh, and
presented himself at the door of Mrs. Jennings, who received him with
all possible courtesy: when informed of the matter he was charged with,
and of his wish to see Amelia, she was summoned, and ready at the call,
ran down stairs, and was instantly in the room: upon seeing a stranger,
she stopped short, fixed her eyes upon him and made a curtsey: John
rose, bowed, and seized at once with admiration and surprize, (not
expecting to be encountered by an object of such striking beauty) seemed
to have lost all recollection of his errand, and stood as if he had no
other business but to gaze in silence. As the embarrassment was now
becoming reciprocal, Mrs. Jennings thought it was high time to remind
him of the commission he had imparted to her. Having lost the words,
with which he meant to preface the delivery of the little pacquet, he
produced it at once, and having delivered it to Amelia, endeavoured to
relate what it was, and how he came by it. His narrative was not very
distinctly given, and as soon as he perceived the effect it was likely
to produce, he stopped short, and looked to Mrs. Jennings for relief.
The lovely girl received it with a trembling hand, and whilst she
murmured out her thanks, opened the pacquet, snatched a momentary glance
upon the relique it contained, and would have sunk upon the floor, had
not John eagerly interposed, and throwing himself on one knee, supported
her in his arms, her head reclining on his shoulder.

When she had recovered, Amelia followed by Mrs. Jennings left the room,
and John remained in solitary meditation for a few minutes, till the
lady of the house returned and made the joint apologies of Amelia and
herself for having left him so abruptly. As soon as he was certified
that there was no further cause for alarm, he began to describe to Mrs.
Jennings how much he was enchanted and surprised by the uncommon beauty
of her lovely charge, who, when he had prepared himself to see a little
girl running into the room, had presented herself to him with all the
graces of a finished woman, elegant in her manners and charming in her
person.

Perhaps, said Mrs. Jennings, you were not aware that my poor orphan is
but two years younger than yourself. As to the beauty, which you are
pleased to notice, I rather think it is more a promise than an actual
possession; but of her more essential good qualities I can confidently
speak; for a better disposition, greater modesty of nature and
benevolence of heart I never yet contemplated in human creature. To
these virtues she was born; these at least, poor child, she inherits
from her parents, and I think that portrait fronting you, which you are
now looking at, conveys no slight impression of an amiable and noble
character; it is a striking likeness of her father, taken by an eminent
artist, who was a visitor at Glen-Morgan, when Captain Jones passed a
few days with your grandfather, before his embarking for the West
Indies, which I well remember he did on the very day that you were born
at Kray Castle.

And to the very day, on which I cease to live, exclaimed our hero,
raising his voice, and directing his eyes to the portrait, I swear I
will devote myself to the protection of his orphan daughter. Unhappy,
gallant man! I have his history from his faithful soldier. Would he
could hear me! I almost can believe he does; for mark, how tenderly his
eyes are turned upon me. Ah sweet Amelia, what I may be I know not, but
yours in every faithful service I shall be. Our first acquaintance has
commenced in sorrow; Heaven grant, it may grow up and ripen into joy.

This said, he turned his eyes from the picture, and behold they lighted
on Amelia, standing by his side. Surprised, confused, and doubting
whether he beheld a vision or reality, he threw his arms about her,
clasped her to his heart, and in his transport pressed his glowing lips
upon her blushing cheek. Then rushing to the door--Pardon me, he
cried--and vanished with love’s arrow in his heart.

Ah madam, ah my friend, exclaimed the trembling girl, succour me, save
me, or I am undone. If this young heir of two such rich and ancient
families does not at once resolve never to waste a thought on me, what
will become of me? What will his grandfather, whose bread I eat, what
will his mother say? The house of De Lancaster will rise against me,
and I must fly to labour for my living, or involve you in my ruin.

It is even so, my child, and you discern your danger rightly. He is a
noble, generous youth, but he never can be yours in any time to come,
and you must cautiously avoid him. As for what passed just now, you must
think no more of it. Young spirits, taken by surprise, will break out
unawares, and you must forgive him.

Forgive him! cried Amelia; yes, it is easy to forgive him, but when
shall I be able to forget him? Never.

Whilst this conversation was carrying on, a note was delivered to Mrs.
Jennings, in which she read as follows.--

             “Madam,

     “I cannot leave this place till you assure me that Miss Jones has
     recovered from the alarm, which my inconsiderate conduct was the
     cause of, and that I have not offended past forgiveness.

                 I have the honour to be, &c.
                           “John De Lancaster.”

To this Mrs. Jennings instantly returned the following answer--

           “Sir,

     You have given no offence to Amelia Jones, but as you know the
     delicacy, that is due to a destitute young orphan in her dependant
     situation, I am sure your sensibility will remind you how necessary
     it will be for her peace, and how consistent with your honour, to
     leave her in her obscurity, and suffer me to hope this interview
     will be the last.

                                                          “&c. &c.”




CHAPTER III.

_Business, long postponed, is at length concluded to the Satisfaction of
all Parties._


We have before observed, that opposition of opinions made no breach in
friendship between the worthy parties, who were in the habit of carrying
on the debates, that occurred at Kray Castle. In the first place it is
not certain that Robert De Lancaster was in all cases tenacious of his
argument merely from conviction of its strength, but partly perhaps from
attachment to it for its singularity, and the occasion it afforded him
oftentimes of displaying that fund of philological erudition, which he
indisputably possessed: in the second place, it is not to be denied,
that whenever he was absolutely convinced of the opinion he defended,
he was not apt to think the worse of it, because his friend Wilson could
not be brought to adopt it.

As his researches had chiefly carried him to those authorities, of which
the classical scholar takes no account, so by arming himself with them
in the lists of controversy, he fought with weapons, and made
left-handed thrusts, that even literary men could rarely parry, and
Colonel Wilson never. So equipped, he could lay down a proposition,
which nobody would dispute, and draw inferences from it which nobody
could admit: but let this be considered rather as an exercise of his
ingenuity, than as a defect in his understanding.

Colonel Wilson, who loved the man, and understood his character, saw
with infinite regret his indecision as to the education of his
grandson, whose strong natural understanding demanded cultivation, and
whose handsome person was now ripening into early manhood. Edward, the
younger son of Colonel Wilson had now left the university, having
obtained every honour, that either his classical or academical exercises
could procure for him. He had been ordained deacon, and was now of age
to take priest’s orders. He also contemplated our neglected hero with
compassionate regret, and had taken up a very favourable impression both
of his talents and disposition. He thought with his father on the side
of public education in general, but he did not consider himself upon
those terms with Mr. De Lancaster, which would warrant him to volunteer
any opinion upon the subject.

The opportunity, which he did not venture to seek, one day presented
itself, when De Lancaster, sitting after dinner, addressed himself to
the colonel, and said--I believe I am aware of most of the arguments,
that are usually adduced in favour of a public school, and am so far
from questioning the good sense of those parents, who make that system
of education their choice, that I could almost admit, that out of a
hundred cases it is the wisest course, which can be taken in ninety and
nine: the only question with me is, whether mine be not exactly that
single exception. If I wished to cherish in my grandson’s heart that
early spirit of emulation, which might urge him to the pursuits of fame
and fortune in either of the liberal professions, a public school would
be the proper nursery for his ambition; but that is not my wish. If he
can creditably support the independent station, which his ancestors have
held for many generations past, I aim at nothing more; and surely, when
I admit that public schools are the fittest nurseries for public
characters, I may be allowed to say that private education is properest
for those, who are destined to fill private stations. If John De
Lancaster survives to be the owner of Kray-Castle (which Heaven grant!)
I hope he will there establish his abode, and be found the protector of
merit, the friend of his tenants and the father of the poor. He might do
this without the help of any of the heathen writers, either Greeks or
Romans; but I don’t wish to exclude them; a gentleman should not be
unacquainted with them; though I am painfully and penitently convinced
he may bestow too large a portion of his time upon them. Plutarch in his
treatise, that Grotius has prefixed to his edition of Stobæus, debates
the question how young students are to read the poets, to what extent
and under what exceptions: It is a heavy and Bœotian work, that talks of
many things, and teaches nothing. In this country we manufacture our
children, male and female, and by the labour of the workman attempt to
give them all the same polish, let the materials they are composed of be
ever so inert and heavy. Nobody taught the nightingale to sing, yet
every foolish father and mother conceive they can teach their jackdaw to
carol like that heaven-born songstress. It is lost labour to manure and
dress a soil, in which there is no principle of vegetation. This I trust
is not the case with my grandson John: He is a manly, sensible,
honorable boy, and has given striking proof of a benevolent heart in his
conduct towards the poor soldier, who died in my house; this he did
without instruction from his Horace or his Juvenal, and this perhaps he
would not have had an opportunity of doing at a public school; at all
events I should not have had the opportunity of witnessing it. I
therefore give my preference to a private and domestic education. Now,
Mr. Edward Wilson, you, who are covered with laurels, worthily bestowed
upon you by your venerable Alma Mater, if you think I am in error,
convince me of my error, and you will not find me backward to retract my
opinion and adopt a better.

To give my opinion, replied Edward Wilson, in a question of such
magnitude would in all cases be presumptuous, but to obtrude it in
contradiction to your superior judgment would be unpardonable.
Circumstanced however as your grandson is in point of age and
understanding, I hold him so unfitted for a station at the very bottom
of a public school, that even without adverting to the very strong
motives, which you assign for education under your own eye, I answer
without hesitation, that my sentiments perfectly agree and coincide with
yours.

I am made very happy by your approbation, said De Lancaster, and now I
must tell you, Mr. Wilson, that an event has been announced to me by
this letter, which in one sense I must consider as a loss, in another as
a gain. My loss is that of an old acquaintance and contemporary, the
late Reverend Dr. Mathew Philips; my gain is the opportunity it affords
me of tendering to you the benefice, which he held by my gift--I
perceive you are about to thank me, but I must request that neither you
nor your father will oppress me on this occasion--for in making you this
offer I do it from my firm persuasion of your fitness, and not merely
through my friendship for your worthy father, which, great and sincere
although it be, would never bias me against my conscience to commit the
charge of souls into the hands of any man, of whose sufficiency I had
cause to doubt. Spare yourselves therefore and me the needless ceremony
of bestowing thanks, where in reality they are not due; for what would
you say, if it should turn out, that I have an object in my view, which
would at once convince you, that in serving you I have not overlooked
myself?

Name the object, I beseech you, Sir, said Edward; and if you hold me
capable of the undertaking, command me!

I perceive you have anticipated my suit, resumed De Lancaster. John, my
grandson, is as yet the only stay and support of an antient and not
ignoble family. Your father has remonstrated with me on the subject of
his neglected education. His motives were friendly, and he made them
known: mine for my seeming negligence had reference to the event, which
I knew to be impending, and has now come to pass, though I could not in
delicacy impart it to him. It was the wish of my heart, dear Edward, to
commit the education of my boy to you; but I confess, such is my nature,
and so am I constituted, that, until I had it in my power to confer a
small favour upon you, I could not ask you to bestow a very great one
upon me.

I am deeply sensible, said Edward, of the honour I derive from your good
opinion, but I am also aware of the importance and difficulty of the
undertaking. That I can teach your grandson Greek and Latin, if he is
disposed to learn, there is little doubt; but when I consider that
amongst my many duties this perhaps will be the lightest, I must look to
you for advice as to the system of education, which you would recommend
me to pursue as we advance in what may be called the beaten track of
school-learning. I confess to you I see no danger in those studies to
the man of deep erudition, but much to the superficial and shallow
scholar, for the morality of the heathen writers is not in all respects
the morality of the gospel, and the philosophy of the Greeks is in no
respect the religion of a christian.

Your observation, said De Lancaster, is perfectly just; but as this is a
subject that will require some fore-thought, I will turn it in my mind,
and give you my opinion upon the first opportunity, that shall occur.
Mr. Philip de Lancaster is now from home, and I think he should by all
means be present at our discussion, that if he does not interest himself
in what so materially concerns his son, he may at least be convinced
that we do.

The topic being thus adjourned, their conversation turned to other
subjects, not important to record.




CHAPTER IV.

_Our young Hero accidentally meets Sir Arthur Floyd, and Mr. Philip De
Lancaster visits a certain Lady at Penruth Abbey._


In the morning of the third day young John De Lancaster left
Glen-Morgan, and set out on his return to Kray Castle. As he was passing
through part of the grounds belonging to Sir Arthur Floyd, whose house
was within sight from his road, he chanced to meet that gentleman, as he
was taking his ride about his demesne. Sir Arthur accosted him with much
civility, and adverting to the accident, that had befallen him in the
field, when he was out with Sir Owen’s hounds, expressed his concern for
the unpleasant consequences that had ensued, and hoped it would not
discourage him from coming out again.

I shall not easily be tempted to come out when Mr. David Owen is in the
field.

I hope, returned the baronet, you do not consider it as a purposed
injury on the part of that young gentleman.

I don’t suppose the gentleman could exactly instruct the horse he rode
to throw dirt in my face, and almost put my eyes out; but I am not
obliged to the gentleman for looking back and laughing at me, when he
discovered the condition I was in.

I trust, resumed Sir Arthur, he did not know the extent of the mischief
he had done, and when he did know it, I hope he made those enquiries,
which it behoved him to make in such a case.

I don’t suppose, said John, Mr. Owen thought that necessary. He had
enjoyed his joke, and was not curious to enquire how I had relished
it--but I have simply answered your questions, Sir Arthur; when I have
serious cause to resent Mr. Owen’s treatment of me, I shall look to him
only for redress.

I hope, young gentleman, said Sir Arthur gravely, you will not consider
me as a busy body in this affair between you, for though my habits of
intimacy are chiefly with the house of Owen, I have all possible respect
for your worthy grandfather, and every one, that bears his name. If I
seem to intrude upon you therefore with any further questions, believe
me it is only in the hope of setting matters straight, which at present
appear to be rather out of course, and accordingly I beg leave to ask
you as to the truth of a report, that circulates about the neighbourhood
respecting a poor distressed soldier, who received charity from you at
your house, and is said to have been very harshly treated at the abbey
door, when supplicating for relief, by young Owen in person.

Such I believe to be the fact, was the answer.

It tells much to the dishonour of the party in question, that being the
fact; but if the soldier be still within reach, I hope you will allow me
to tender you these few guineas for his use on the part of my young
friend David Owen, as an atonement for his oversight.

A piece of bread and a draught of beer might have been of use, but the
money is of none. The man is dead.

My God!--cried Sir Arthur; turned a look of marked regard upon our hero,
bowed and rode off.

Mr. Philip De Lancaster had of late stepped a little out of his
non-elastic character, and been rambling from the castle every forenoon
between the hours of breakfast and dinner. Nobody was curious to trace
him in these excursions, but it could not fail to be discovered, that
his visits were to the Spanish lady at the abbey house of Penruth. To
say that Philip was in love with Mrs. Owen might be to mistake a habit
for a passion; he was in the habit of turning his poney’s head
abbey-ward, as soon as he had sallied from the castle-gate, and poney
was in the habit of going on without any turn at all till he stopped at
the aforesaid abbey door. When Philip dismounted, Mrs. Owen’s lacquey
was also in the habit of ushering him to his lady’s sitting-room, where
he silently took his chair and his chance for being spoken to, when the
lady was in the humour and at leisure to speak to him.

The first remark, that had ever dropped from Mr. De Lancaster with
respect to Philip’s absence, occurred in his discourse with the Wilsons
about John’s education, and it so happened that Mrs. Owen in her tete à
tete that very morning had been rather more disposed to extort a
conversation than was usual with her, when the following very
interesting dialogue ensued.

I conclude, said the lady, that this extraordinary melancholy, which
seems to hang eternally upon you, my good friend, can only be accounted
for by your concern for Mrs. De Lancaster’s dismal state of health and
spirits.

Not at all, said Philip: that’s not it.

What is it then? What in the name of wonder can it be?

I can’t tell. It comes of its own accord.

I don’t know how to believe you. There must be some cause: as sure as
can be you have caught the hip of your hypochondriac wife.

I have nothing to do with any hip of hers. I never go near her: that’s
agreed between us.

A happy release, if what I hear be true. Then you have no domestic
troubles.

None at all: quite free.

Why then so gloomy? What annoys you, what possesses you so wholly, that
you seem almost to have lost the very use of speech? Are you in love, my
friend?

Not with my wife.

With any body else?

With any body rather than with her.

With me, for instance--

Oh, with you sooner than with any body. I visit nobody but you.

True, but I thought you visited me from habit, not from liking.

I like you very much.

What shall I do to encrease your liking?

Nothing. It encreases quite fast enough without your help.

Bless me! That’s lucky; for to say the truth I have not been aware of
it. But I am so surprised, and so flattered by it, that I would fain
take some pains to cultivate so agreeable an impression.

You need not. There’s no occasion to trouble yourself about it.

Should not I contrive to make myself a little younger?

I don’t wish it.

A good deal handsomer?

It is not possible.

A great deal fairer?

That would entirely spoil the beauty of your complexion.

Well! that is charming. I protest you make me the politest speeches; but
alas! they go for nothing. No woman of discretion should encourage the
attachment of a man that’s married.

I may not always be a married man.

That’s true; but then perhaps you’d change your tone.

Never.

Were I quite sure of that, I would not listen to Sir Arthur Floyd; nor
indeed to any body in Sir Owen’s life time--but recollect we have each a
son. What must we do with them? They’ll never set their horses up
together. What is the reason that they don’t agree? I doubt your
youngster is a little proud. Isn’t it so?

I know nothing of him.

My David does not like him, I assure you. He says he is certain you are
not his father.

I know nothing of that also.

He never speaks of him by the name of John De Lancaster; he calls him
Jack Jones after the name of your wife’s favourite lover Captain Jones,
for whom she is so inconsolable.

Why now that’s wonderful--I can’t think how that secret could get out.

Secret, my friend! You are much mistaken if you think it is any secret.
They say he is as like that Jones as ever son was like a father--but I
am talking treason, and you must not betray me--People you know will be
censorious, and it is rather remarkable, that since Jones’s death she
has never added to your family stock.

There’s nothing remarkable in that, if the talking people knew what they
talked about.

Why certainly, were the case as they give out, one son of that sort is
quite enough, and were I in your place I should be apt to think him one
more than was welcome.

I am at no trouble about him. His grandfather and his aunt are at all
the pains of spoiling him.

Not by overmuch education I should think. Begging the young gentleman’s
pardon, I take him to be a most egregious dunce.

Oh! if you take him to be that, I shall take him to be my own son. But
with your leave we’ll say no more about him.

Agreed! Besides I know your time is nearly out. This however I must tell
you in secret--Sir Owen’s life is despaired of, and his whole estate is
settled and entailed upon my son: David will soon be of age, and
probably I shall then have some other residence to seek. Your father I
understand is in his seventy-fifth year, and your son in his fifteenth.
A short time according to the course of nature may set us both free. In
the mean time let me see you as frequently as you can contrive, and if I
have been fortunate enough to make an impression on your heart, be
assured you have interested mine no less; and so long as you continue to
persuade me that I am agreeable in your eyes, neither Sir Arthur Floyd,
nor any man, shall be other than indifferent to me.

Having said this, she reached out her hand, the gallant Philip pressed
it to his lips, made his reverence, and departed.




CHAPTER V.

_Mr. De Lancaster descants upon the Duties of a Preceptor in the learned
Languages._


It is probably in the reader’s recollection, that De Lancaster in his
last conversation with the Reverend Edward Wilson, had promised to
collect his thoughts, and offer his opinion on the duties of a preceptor
in the learned languages. There was little danger of his forgetting that
promise, nor any likelihood of his being unprepared to execute it, for
his mind was fully stored with all the several systems of the Greek
philosophers.

After breakfast the next morning he desired Philip to accompany him and
the Wilsons, father and son, into his library. This was not exactly the
thing, that Philip had meditated to do, but it was what he could not
escape from. He was not however hooked without a small struggle to get
free, for as soon as he understood it was to be a cabinet council on the
topic of his son’s education, he humbly moved for exemption on the plea
of his entire acquiescence in his father’s will and pleasure, modestly
declaring that he did not hold himself entitled to form any opinion in
the case--besides, he should be glad to take a little air, for his
health’s sake.

I hope, son Philip, said the old gentleman gravely, neither your health,
nor happiness, and give me leave to add--nor your honour can suffer, if
you bestow one hour upon your duty to your son, even at the expence of
your accustomed devoirs to the lady at the abbey.

This was answer quite enough for Philip, who walked doggedly into the
lecture room, and took his seat in a corner of it, as far out of the
reach of instruction or notice, as he could devise. Edward Wilson took
the left hand seat by De Lancaster’s arm-chair, and the colonel seated
himself on the other side of the fire place, in front of the old
gentleman; Philip, as I before observed, falling into the back-ground,
and behind his father.

After two or three preparatory hums, like the tap of the first fiddle,
as a signal for attention, De Lancaster commenced his harangue, as
follows--Mr. Edward Wilson, I address myself to you in particular,
because what you remarked at the close of our late conversation is
perfectly in my recollection, and convinces me, that my opinions can
only tend to confirm what your own judgment and observation have pointed
out. I am now assured, that when you commit your pupil to the reading of
those heathen authors, whose writings yet exist, though their languages
be dead, you will not suffer his principles to come into collision with
theirs, till they are fundamentally and firmly established upon faith in
revelation; for where that does not reach, all must be error, seeing
that the human understanding, how acute so ever, cannot upon mere
conjecture account for the operations of divine wisdom unless by the aid
of a divine communication. All, who without that aid have attempted to
discuss the question of _first causes_, have puzzled and perplexed
themselves and others. A sound scholar can readily confute their
systems; a shallow one, as you well observed, may be entangled by their
subtilties. In short, they are at the best but blind guides; most of
them are mischievous logicians, and many of them systematic atheists;
for collect their several tenets, and I am warranted to say you shall
find they are all to be classed, either amongst those, who hold the
world to be eternal both as to matter and form, or those, who hold the
matter to be eternal, whilst the form is not. You are no doubt aware,
that neither Aristotle nor Plato admit a creation of the world, or
acknowledge any time when it was not: Aristotle maintaining that it was
an eternal and necessary emanation from the divine nature; Plato, that
it was an eternal and voluntary effect. Now if what God must have willed
from all time he must from all time have done, where is the distinction
betwixt Plato’s volition and Aristotle’s necessity? In these opinions
are to be found all the component parts of modern atheism. The monstrous
system of Spinosa is principally to be traced in the doctrines of the
Eleatic school, of which Xenophanes was the founder; he was succeeded by
Parmenides, Melissus and Zeno of Elea: his doctrines, which were
delivered in verse and with great obscurity, were adopted by Hilpo and
the Megaric philosophers, and these were supposed to be the eternity and
immutability of the world. Strato of Lampsacus, whom Plutarch calls the
greatest of the Peripatetics, made nature inanimate, and at the same
time owned no God but nature. The Stoics had their dogma of the soul of
the world; the Epicureans held that God is matter, or not distinct from
matter; that all things are essentially God, that forms are imaginary
accidents, which have no real existence, and that all things are
substantially the same. I believe I need go no further with the Greek
philosophers, for in these you have nearly the abstract amount of their
opinions, and the sources of all modern infidelity. As for the
cosmogonies of the Phœnicians, Egyptians and Babylonians, which derive
the world from mechanical principles only, they are immediately
introductive of atheism, as Eusebius of Cæsarea observes of
Sanchoniatho, whose fragment he preserved, and Berosus of the Babylonian
cosmogony, of which nation he himself was. To the doctrines of Orpheus
the theologer I have no objection; with him your pupil will be safe.
Hesiod is only fanciful. Of Thales the hylopathian, whose principle of
things was water, I should doubt whether he was theist or atheist; but
of his scholar Anaximander no doubt can be entertained; his system is
professedly atheistical; the same principle descends and may be traced
through Anaximenes, Anaxagoras and Diogenes of Apollonia, in a word,
through all the masters of the Ionic school. Turn to Leucippus and
Democritus, to Epicurus and all, who held the doctrine of atoms, what do
you discover but the blindest ignorance and the grossest atheism? As for
their celebrated physician Hippocrates, who, following the example of
Hippasus and Heraclitus the obscure, held heat or fire to be immortal
and omniscient, in one word God himself, I can only say it would have
been safer to have taken his physic than his philosophy--but I have too
long intruded on your patience, and forbear the rest.

When Edward Wilson perceived that De Lancaster had done speaking, being
unable to discover how this harangue could be brought into use for any
present purpose, and conceiving himself not called upon to say that he
would not put a pupil to read the Greek philosophers, who had not yet
read the first leaf of his Latin grammar, he bowed and was silent.
Philip sate with his hands upon his knees in the attitude of a hearer,
and seemed employed upon a very close examination of his boots, as if in
search of information from them; but they knew just as much, and no
more, of the subject than he himself did.--I wonder why I was called in
to hear all this, he said to himself, who know no more what he has been
talking about than if he had expressed himself in the Hebrew language.
The colonel on the contrary was under no reserve, but turning to De
Lancaster, said, I cannot doubt, my good sir, but that all, which you
have been saying, would be excellent advice to a student far advanced in
his knowledge of the learned languages, but in the instance of my friend
John I presume the time, when it can apply to him, lies yet at a
considerable distance.

You are right, replied De Lancaster, and therefore as I cannot expect to
say it then, I take the liberty to say it now.

The man, whose ridicule could not have been disarmed by the candour of
this temperate reply, must have had a heart very differently made from
that of Colonel Wilson; and as for Edward he immediately found his
voice, and was liberal of his thanks for the instruction he had
received. I shall hardly expect, he said, to do more for my pupil, than
to make him acquainted with some of the best and purest classics, so as
to form his taste, and qualify him to take his part in those circles, in
which he ought to be found: But if he should contract a passion for
literature, I shall bear in mind what you have been inculcating, and
hope it will be my good fortune to find his understanding stored with
such defences, as no false reasoning shall be likely to undermine. This
object will be ever nearest to my heart, and as I am sure I have an
excellent disposition to work upon, I trust your grandson will grow up,
if God gives him life, to be an honour to his name and nation.

I am satisfied, said De Lancaster, and have not another word to offer.

That is lucky, quoth Philip, as his father walked out of the room; for I
am yet in time to take my ride. This was overheard by Colonel Wilson,
and provoked him to say to Philip--If you are going to take your usual
ride to the Abbey, I hope you will recollect by the way your obligations
to a father, the matter of whose discourse may have seemed tedious to
you, but whose motive being zeal for the welfare of your son, ought to
be held in honour and respect.




CHAPTER VI.

_Mr. De Lancaster proposes to revive certain ancient Modes of curing
Diseases._


A project had been conceived by Mr. De Lancaster for calling together an
assembly of the chief neighbouring minstrels on Saint Cecilia’s day, in
which he had the double purpose of patronizing that ancient British
instrument, which he had so much at heart, and at the same time paying a
side-way compliment to his daughter, named after that harmonious saint.

Great preparations were now going forward for celebrating that musical
festival (which was a kind of revival of the ancient eisteddfods) with
becoming splendour. Invitations had been circulated to all the
neighbouring gentry; notices were dispersed over the country for
assembling the most celebrated harpers, and David Williams was warmly
engaged in making daily libations of metheglin to propitiate his muse
for that grand occasion.

The castle hall in the mean time resounded with the hammers of the
workmen, employed in erecting a stage for the minstrels, and in fitting
up seats and benches for the company. The banners were overhauled, taken
down and cleaned, and a great display of these and warlike weapons was
disposed in groups and trophies under the direction of Colonel Wilson.
Cecilia’s province was to superintend supplies, and adapt the several
entertainments to the several degrees of guests, to whom they were
allotted.

Philip De Lancaster still maintained his natural tranquillity, though
from some cause, or it might be from none, he had abated of the
frequency of his visits to the abbey. He gave himself however no trouble
in a business perfectly indifferent to him: the utmost stretch of his
exertions went no further than to the making of an artificial fly for
angling in a stream, where there were no trout, and Wilson had but
little time to spare for chess. Two qualifications Philip had to boast
of; the one was that of being an excellent and unwearied hearer, so long
as any other person would take the trouble of talking; the other, that
of an everlasting sleeper, provided nobody would put him to the trouble
of waking. Between these two happy properties he could dispose both of
day and of night passably well.

His lady in the meanwhile contrived to fill up her hours with sighs and
groans, which were echoed back to her in groans and sighs by
sympathizing Betty. Cecilia visited her at leisure times; her son
occasionally, when called for, and her husband by her desire very
rarely, and of his own accord never. Llewellyn was in regular attendance
and full confidence; he pronounced her case to be atrabilious and
hypochondriac in an extreme degree, and as there could be no doubt of
his being right in deciding on the nature of her complaint, it seemed
rather unlucky that he was so unsucessful in removing it. As far however
as the frequency of attendances and repetition of medicines went, Mr.
Llewellyn was clear in conscience.

One evening, whilst the Colonel and Squire Philip were engaged at chess,
and De Lancaster was tracing out for the edification of Edward Wilson
the route of Solomon’s ships to Ophir for gold, Llewellyn came into the
room to announce his bulletin of the patient above stairs. Philip’s game
was lost, and he had quitted the field; the colonel put the chess-board
by, and all ears were open to the report, of which the sage’s
countenance augured nothing favourable. The question was put to him by
more than one, the answer was--The lady my patient is by no means as I
could wish her.--Then I am afraid, observed the colonel, she is by no
means well.

I hope that does not absolutely follow, said De Lancaster.

She is extremely ill, repeated Llewellyn--She is incurable, cried Philip
with an emphasis and in a tone above his usual pitch.

I think not, replied the father.

She is the most decided hypochondriac I ever met with, resumed the man
of medicine.

Pooh! repeated De Lancaster, if my daughter-in-law has no other
complaint than what is caused by melancholy humours and impeded
circulation, she may be cured at once; the remedy is immediate.

Why; what should cure her? demanded the colonel.

That, which alone can heal the mind and its diseases, said De Lancaster;
music.

Whuh! cried Llewellyn, (whistling out his admiration and contempt in an
under-note, not meant to reach the ears of the old gentleman) This is a
new discovery in medicine, and one more than the dispensary has yet
taken notice of.

Pardon me, resumed De Lancaster, it is no new discovery, but the very
doctrine held by Theophrastus, Aristoxenus and by Pythagoras himself;
the last of whom depended almost entirely on the flute or flagelet for
the expulsion of melancholy; and, as I am no dealer in assertions
without authorities, I shall take the liberty of quoting the very words
of Martianus Capella in his ninth book, which to Mr. Edward Wilson at
least I have no doubt will be familiar, and these they are--_Pythagorei
enim, ferociam animi tibiis aut fidibus mollientes, docuerunt cum
corporibus adhærere nexum fædus animarum_. In this practice however I
must beg leave slightly to differ from the Pythagoreans, and recommend
the harp or lyre in preference, forasmuch as these were the proper
instruments of Apollo, the god of healing, whereas the flute or flagelet
belonged to Tritonia, whose attributes we all know were of a different
description. Let me however do Pythagoras the justice to acknowledge,
that he recommends the lute also as a sedative in the paroxysms of rage
and anger.

Here the colonel interposed, by observing, that what effect a flute, or
a lute, or a flagelet might have upon the passions of mankind he could
not pretend to say, but he apprehended neither one nor the other could
have any thing to do with their diseases, and to this Llewellyn assented
with a significant nod of approbation. De Lancaster had now got amongst
his sophists and grammarians, and committed himself much too far to halt
upon a nod; he proceeded therefore as follows--

Whilst there subsists a sympathy between the senses and the soul, the
intellectual remedy for man must be sought for in harmony. All the
nations under heaven, whether civilized or not, have borne witness to
the powers and effects of music. The Mariandyni, a wild people
inhabiting the confines of Bithynia, made their national music from
pipes, which they formed of the reeds, that grew upon the borders of the
lake Acherusia. The pipe was also the favourite of those mountain
shepherds of Bœotia, called Aonians; whilst the Egyptians with more
ingenuity struck out the complex instrument called Pandura, which was
composed of no less than seven pipes.

We have in our practice, said Llewellyn, an instrument with one pipe,
but I can’t for my soul conceive the use, that can be made of seven.

It was doubtless an instrument of no inconsiderable difficulty to the
performer, replied De Lancaster gravely.

I should not chuse to perform upon it, said the apothecary.

The good old gentleman was in the high road of philology, and kept
steadily on--The characters of nations, said he, are to be traced in the
different characters of their warlike instruments. The Cretans marched
in compact and orderly phalanx to the solemn sound of the harp: the
Lacedemonians rushed into battle to the high-pitched screaming notes of
the shrill-toned fife; whilst the effeminate Sybarites would not move
without the soft accompaniment of their melodious flutes.

But which of all these instruments, said the colonel, is to cure Mrs. De
Lancaster?

Refer that question to Asclepiades, replied De Lancaster, and he will
answer you; Asclepiades will tell you, when the citizens of Prusa were
in actual insurrection, and the city on the point of being laid in
ashes, how he contrived to appease the tumult, and sent them all to
their homes in peace.

But Mrs. De Lancaster is at home already, said Llewellyn, and peaceable
enough, Heaven knows. How does the case of these rioters apply to her?

The colonel saw his friend was staggered, and handsomely turned out to
his relief--It is impossible, he said, to foresee what turn a case may
take, therefore it is well to be armed against accidents. I should be
glad if our good friend would tell us how it was that Asclepiades, whom
I have no means of resorting to, contrived to disperse the mob of
incendiaries at Prusa.

By a song, replied the old gentleman; he dispersed them by the sweet
and soothing melody of a pathetic strain, which assuaged their fury,
and lulled them into peace, as an obstreperous child (for men are only
children of a larger growth) is hushed to sleep by the humming of its
nurse.

I am perfectly satisfied, said the colonel.




CHAPTER VII.

_Mr. Philip De Lancaster determines to adopt the Regimen recommended by
his Father._


The decisive tone, with which Colonel Wilson, at the close of our last
chapter, avowed his perfect satisfaction in De Lancaster’s explanation
of Asclepiades’s receipt for quieting a mob, occasioned such a pause, as
might very probably have put an end to this topic, had not the Reverend
Edward Wilson availed himself of the general silence to revive it. He
had been closely attentive to the progress of this whimsical
dissertation, and sensibly annoyed by the frequent interruptions it had
met with, whereupon, having watched his opportunity, he said--Permit me
to observe, that I, for one of Mr. De Lancaster’s hearers, can never be
perfectly satisfied so long as he shall be pleased to continue to us the
gratification of a discourse, at once so new, and, to me at least, so
highly entertaining and instructive. In several passages of it even my
small share of reading enables me to recognize some of the authorities
he has referred to, and I have no doubt but he is equally warranted in
all others, where I am not able to follow him; and allow me to remark,
that if his information does not in every point apply to the particular
case of the hypochondriac lady, for whose recovery we are interested,
yet even in those points of occasional aberration from the subject,
there is matter well worthy of our attention, and I therefore hope Mr.
De Lancaster will have the goodness to proceed with his dissertation on
the effects of music, as recorded and attested by the ancient writers.

Reverend sir, said Robert De Lancaster, your remarks are at once so
candid, and your request so flattering to me, that I will contract what
I have further to say in such a manner as shall not weary you, and I
will ground it upon such authorities as shall not mislead you. Damon,
the Pythagorean philosopher, a man not less to be relied upon for his
veracity, than for his friendship and fidelity, by the simple recitation
of the spondean hymn allayed a drunken fray in the streets of Syracuse,
when raging at the height, in an instant, and as it were by magic.

And pray, said the colonel, what kind of composition was the spondean
hymn?

It was a hymn, replied De Lancaster, performed by the priests and
minstrels in the heathen temples as a prelude to the ceremony of
sacrifice, and it was called spondean, as consisting of such syllables
only, which gives us to understand the solemn character of the
composition, the object of which was to engage the attention, and
conciliate the favour of their deities, whilst the incense was in
operation.

If it could do that, said the colonel, and make dead idols serviceable,
I can’t wonder it should make drunken insurgents sober.

Sir--replied the expounder, (lengthening out the word into a note of
something like asperity) You have not heard me out, else I should have
told you, that ancient sages cured fevers, fits of melancholy, phrensy,
nay, even bodily wounds, by the sanative and enchanting power of song.
Who, that has but dipped into their remedies, can be ignorant, that soft
airs, well executed on the flute, were found to be a never-failing cure
for the sciatica, or hip-gout, as it is called? A host of witnesses
conspire to testify to the truth of what I tell you. Can it have escaped
the notice of any well-read scholar by what means Theophrastus found a
remedy for every malady, every molestation, that could disorder and
disturb the health and temperature of the human mind? Sir, he had an
instrument appropriated to every mental complaint, a pipe tuned to the
pitch of every passion, high or low, flat or sharp. Xenocrates brought
men stark mad to their senses. Thales of Crete drove away fevers, nay,
even the plague itself, by music. Erophilus regulated the pulsation of
the hearts of his patients by the cadences and time-keeping of his lyre.

We do that quite as correctly by our watches, said Llewellyn.

De Lancaster took no notice of this, but proceeded--Can you any longer
wonder that the sage, who has made sympathy his study, and is versed in
the science of these harmonious modulations and their respective
energies, should effect those cures, which are recorded of them, and
which, when explained and understood, are no longer hard to be believed?
As for what is fabled of Amphion, Orpheus and others, who by the united
powers of music and legislative poetry succeeded in reforming and
civilizing their barbarous contemporaries, I would not have you to
suppose I cannot distinguish allegory from fact. In the same light I
regard the account, which Suidas gives us of the philosopher Plato, who
was reported to have been begotten of his mother in a vision by the
melody of the harp of Apollo.

I should be inclined to doubt that, said the colonel.

Nay, resumed De Lancaster, there is no occasion to debate what nobody
wishes you to believe. You cannot but perceive it is merely an
allegorical compliment to the genius of that extraordinary person, whose
deep researches into the mysterious theory of sounds and numbers having
enabled him to speculate in a very ingenious manner upon the doctrine
of harmony, as connected with the movements of the celestial spheres,
and also with the human soul even after death, was feigned to have been
the very offspring of that harmony, which he developed and applied.
These legends, and the like of these, I know how to appreciate, and with
what latitude they are to be received; at the same time I am not to be
shaken in my confidence, when relying on the ancients, who studied music
as a science, whilst we do little more than practise it as an art, and
of course stand in the like relation to them as fiddlers do to
philosophers. In short, my friends, it is not man alone that is the
slave of harmony, but the whole brute creation also: if stags can be
allured by the pipe; if the fishes in the Alexandrian lake will
surrender themselves to the song of the fisherman; if the hyperborean
swan, if the birds of the air, at once so fearful and so free; nay, if
even the wild elephant of India, and the ear-stricken inhabitants of the
ocean, will yield themselves up to the minstrel, who will tell me, that
a mere moping hypochondriac, like my poor daughter-in-law, might not be
cured of her distempered fancy by the harp of David Williams?

De Lancaster having closed his argument, and dismissed his witnesses,
the audience broke up; Llewellyn repaired to his patient, Edward Wilson
to his pupil, and Philip whispered to the colonel, that he should be
glad to have a few minutes talk with him in private. This was instantly
complied with, and Philip opened the important conference, as follows--

I should wish to know, colonel, if you attended to what my father has
been saying?

The colonel had attended.

I am glad of it, said Philip, for I was a little absent now and then,
and have not carried much of it away. But do you believe all those
wonderful things, that he has told us, about music?

I perfectly believe that your father has told nothing about music, but
what he has vouchers for, though I don’t know where to look for them.

Nor I neither, Heaven knows, said Philip, for I have no taste for music,
nor can distinguish between one tune and another, except as it is either
loud or soft: if it is the first, it deafens and distracts me; if the
latter, it puts me to sleep. I don’t suppose it is in the art of man to
teach me to sing or play a single tune, though it were to save my life.

That won’t quite decide the question however, my good friend; for music
certainly can charm others, though it has no charms for you. What I have
seen and witnessed I believe; what I am told I pause upon. Martial music
will animate martial men, and not them only, but the horses also, which
they ride to battle: hounds are sensible to the shouts of the hunter,
and the whole race of dogs to the voices of their masters: birds can be
taught tunes, though you and I cannot, and there are doubtless great and
extraordinary powers in musical sounds, though perhaps all that is said
of those powers may not be exactly as it is stated.

I should suppose not; for if I was to believe that David Williams with
his harp could cure my melancholy dame of her megrims, don’t you think I
ought in conscience to make the trial?

I think at least, friend Philip, that the trial would do her no harm;
for if she did not like to hear his music, she could easily put a stop
to it.

But suppose, colonel, that she should like to hear it; and suppose also
for a moment it should have the same effect upon her as Apollo’s harp
had upon Plato’s mother, whereabouts should I be with a whole nursery of
harp-begotten brats to provide for, conscious at the same time that I
had not touched a single string of the instrument?

That would be rather hard upon you I confess.

Lord love you, colonel, even worse things than that might come to pass.
I am very comfortable as I am, but who can tell what a few merry jigs
upon the harp may do? They might be the ruin of my peace for ever.

Never fear, my good friend, replied the colonel. Depend upon it, you are
in no danger.

Well! if you think so, said Philip, I will go to David Williams, and put
my wife under a course of serenades directly: It may perhaps please the
Lord, that they shall do her neither good nor harm.

So saying, Philip left the room, and Wilson went to superintend his
workmen in the hall.

       *       *       *       *       *

I here close the third book and first volume of my history, and,
availing myself of the licence I have assumed in the two preceding
books, I stop progress to look back upon what hitherto has been done: no
mighty matter I confess; yet it has put me to the labour of turning over
many a crabbed antiquated author to furnish out materials for these
pages; and to what purpose? Wiser perhaps I had been to have followed
the example of those easy gentlemen, who write without any pains what
you read without any profit.

What recommendation would it be of this book, if humbly I should say, it
can do no harm? But if vainly I avowed that it was my object and
endeavour to do good, I might indeed speak the truth as to my wishes,
but I should palpably disguise my expectations. It will do no good.
Reformers are as unpopular as informers; the medicine, which nobody will
take, can do nobody any service. When I witness the avidity, with which
men will read a thing called a novel, wherein the characters of their
friends are libelled, what folly would it be to suppose they will
countenance an attempt to impress them with more kindness for their
fellow-creatures than they are disposed to entertain, or will suffer
themselves to be persuaded, that their fellow-creatures merit?

I have been too long acquainted with you, my dear candid readers, to
trouble you with any compliments, or solicit you for any favours. I have
only to say, that I am doing my utmost to amuse you, and if you shall
lay down this volume with any appetite for the second, I hope you will
not find that my exertions flag.


                       END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


                  WRIGHT, Printer, St. John’s Square.

       Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

                 been mispent=> been misspent {pg 24}

 vaulted casmate so fortified=> vaulted casemate so fortified {pg 57}

            the same tranport=> the same transport {pg 166}

          bodily acheivements=> bodily achievements {pg 182}

                 had recieved=> had received {pg 215}



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN DE LANCASTER; VOL.
I. ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
